Title: The Man in the Iron Mask - Part 2

CHAPTER XXX.
The Inventory of M de Beaufort.

To have talked of D’Artagnan with Planchet, to have seen Planchet quit
Paris to bury himself in his country retreat, had been for Athos and his
son like a last farewell to the noise of the capital--to their life of
former days. What, in fact, did these men leave behind them--one of whom
had exhausted the past age in glory, and the other, the present age
in misfortune? Evidently neither of them had anything to ask of his
contemporaries. They had only to pay a visit to M de Beaufort, and
arrange with him the particulars of departure. The duke was lodged
magnificently in Paris. He had one of those superb establishments
pertaining to great fortunes, the like of which certain old men
remembered to have seen in all their glory in the times of wasteful
liberality of Henry III.’s reign. Then, really, several great nobles
were richer than the king. They knew it, used it, and never deprived
themselves of the pleasure of humiliating his royal majesty when they
had an opportunity. It was this egotistical aristocracy Richelieu had
constrained to contribute, with its blood, its purse, and its duties, to
what was from his time styled the king’s service. From Louis XI.--that
terrible mower-down of the great--to Richelieu, how many families had
raised their heads! How many, from Richelieu to Louis XIV., had bowed
their heads, never to raise them again! But M de Beaufort was born a
prince, and of a blood which is not shed upon scaffolds, unless by the
decree of peoples,--a prince who had kept up a grand style of living.
How did he maintain his horses, his people, and his table? Nobody knew;
himself less than others. Only there were then privileges for the sons
of kings, to whom nobody refused to become a creditor, whether from
respect or the persuasion that they would some day be paid.

Athos and Raoul found the mansion of the duke in as much confusion as
that of Planchet. The duke, likewise, was making his inventory; that is
to say, he was distributing to his friends everything of value he had
in his house. Owing nearly two millions--an enormous amount in those
days--M de Beaufort had calculated that he could not set out for
Africa without a good round sum, and, in order to find that sum, he was
distributing to his old creditors plate, arms, jewels, and furniture,
which was more magnificent in selling it, and brought him back double.
In fact, how could a man to whom ten thousand livres were owing, refuse
to carry away a present worth six thousand, enhanced in estimation from
having belonged to a descendant of Henry IV.? And how, after having
carried away that present, could he refuse ten thousand livres more to
this generous noble? This, then, was what had happened. The duke had
no longer a dwelling-house--that had become useless to an admiral whose
place of residence is his ship; he had no longer need of superfluous
arms, when he was placed amidst his cannons; no more jewels, which the
sea might rob him of; but he had three or four hundred thousand crowns
fresh in his coffers. And throughout the house there was a joyous
movement of people who believed they were plundering monseigneur. The
prince had, in a supreme degree, the art of making happy the creditors
most to be pitied. Every distressed man, every empty purse, found in him
patience and sympathy for his position. To some he said, “I wish I had
what _you_ have; I would give it you.” And to others, “I have but this
silver ewer; it is worth at least five hundred livres,--take it.” The
effect of which was--so truly is courtesy a current payment--that the
prince constantly found means to renew his creditors. This time he
used no ceremony; it might be called a general pillage. He gave up
everything. The Oriental fable of the poor Arab who carried away from
the pillage of palace a kettle at the bottom of which was concealed a
bag of gold, and whom everybody allowed to pass without jealousy,--this
fable had become a truth in the prince’s mansion. Many contractors paid
themselves upon the offices of the duke. Thus, the provision department,
who plundered the clothes-presses and the harness-rooms, attached very
little value to things which tailors and saddlers set great store by.
Anxious to carry home to their wives presents given them by monseigneur,
many were seen bounding joyously along, under the weight of earthen
jars and bottles, gloriously stamped with the arms of the prince. M. de
Beaufort finished by giving away his horses and the hay from his lofts.
He made more than thirty happy with kitchen utensils; and thirty more
with the contents of his cellar. Still further; all these people went
away with the conviction that M de Beaufort only acted in this manner
to prepare for a new fortune concealed beneath the Arabs’ tents. They
repeated to each other, while pillaging his hotel, that he was sent to
Gigelli by the king to reconstruct his lost fortunes; that the treasures
of Africa would be equally divided between the admiral and the king of
France; that these treasures consisted in mines of diamonds, or other
fabulous stones; the gold and silver mines of Mount Atlas did not
even obtain the honor of being named. In addition to the mines to be
worked--which could not be begun till after the campaign--there would
be the booty made by the army. M de Beaufort would lay his hands on
all the riches pirates had robbed Christendom of since the battle of
Lepanto. The number of millions from these sources defied calculation.
Why, then, should he, who was going in quest of such treasure, set
any store by the poor utensils of his past life? And reciprocally, why
should they spare the property of him who spared it so little himself?

Such was the position of affairs. Athos, with his piercing practiced
glance, saw what was going on at once. He found the admiral of France a
little exalted, for he was rising from a table of fifty covers, at
which the guests had drunk long and deeply to the prosperity of the
expedition; at the conclusion of which repast, the remains, with the
dessert, had been given to the servants, and the empty dishes and
plates to the curious. The prince was intoxicated with his ruin and his
popularity at one and the same time. He had drunk his old wine to the
health of his wine of the future. When he saw Athos and Raoul:

“There is my aide-de-camp being brought to me!” he cried. “Come hither,
comte; come hither, vicomte.”

Athos tried to find a passage through the heaps of linen and plate.

“Ah! step over, step over!” said the duke, offering a full glass to
Athos. The latter drank it; Raoul scarcely moistened his lips.

“Here is your commission,” said the prince to Raoul. “I had prepared it,
reckoning upon you. You will go before me as far as Antibes.”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“Here is the order.” And De Beaufort gave Raoul the order. “Do you know
anything of the sea?”

“Yes, monseigneur; I have traveled with M. le Prince.”

“That is well. All these barges and lighters must be in attendance to
form an escort and carry my provisions. The army must be prepared to
embark in a fortnight at the very latest.”

“That shall be done, monseigneur.”

“The present order gives you the right to visit and search all the isles
along the coast; you will there make the enrolments and levies you may
want for me.”

“Yes, monsieur le duc.”

“And you are an active man, and will work freely, you will spend much
money.”

“I hope not, monseigneur.”

“But I am sure you will. My intendant has prepared the orders of a
thousand livres, drawn upon the cities of the south; he will give you a
hundred of them. Now, dear vicomte, be gone.”

Athos interrupted the prince. “Keep your money, monseigneur; war is to
be waged among the Arabs with gold as well as lead.”

“I wish to try the contrary,” replied the duke; “and then you are
acquainted with my ideas upon the expedition--plenty of noise, plenty
of fire, and, if so it must be, I shall disappear in the smoke.” Having
spoken thus, M de Beaufort began to laugh; but his mirth was not
reciprocated by Athos and Raoul. He perceived this at once. “Ah,” said
he, with the courteous egotism of his rank and age, “you are such people
as a man should not see after dinner; you are cold, stiff, and dry when
I am all fire, suppleness, and wine. No, devil take me! I should always
see you fasting, vicomte, and you, comte, if you wear such a face as
that, you shall see me no more.”

He said this, pressing the hand of Athos, who replied with a smile,
“Monseigneur, do not talk so grandly because you happen to have plenty
of money. I predict that within a month you will be dry, stiff, and
cold, in presence of your strong-box, and that then, having Raoul at
your elbow, fasting, you will be surprised to see him gay, animated, and
generous, because he will have some new crowns to offer you.”

“God grant it may be so!” cried the delighted duke. “Comte, stay with
me!”

“No, I shall go with Raoul; the mission with which you charge him is
a troublesome and difficult one. Alone it would be too much for him to
execute. You do not observe, monseigneur, you have given him command of
the first order.”

“Bah!”

“And in your naval arrangements, too.”

“That may be true. But one finds that such fine young fellows as your
son generally do all that is required of them.”

“Monseigneur, I believe you will find nowhere so much zeal and
intelligence, so much real bravery, as in Raoul; but if he failed
to arrange your embarkation, you would only meet the fate that you
deserve.”

“Humph! you are scolding me, then.”

“Monseigneur, to provision a fleet, to assemble a flotilla, to enroll
your maritime force, would take an admiral a year. Raoul is a cavalry
officer, and you allow him a fortnight!”

“I tell you he will do it.”

“He may; but I will go and help him.”

“To be sure you will; I reckoned upon you, and still further believe
that when we are once at Toulon you will not let him depart alone.”

“Oh!” said Athos, shaking his head.

“Patience! patience!”

“Monseigneur, permit us to take our leave.”

“Begone, then, and may my good luck attend you.”

“Adieu! monseigneur; and may your own good luck attend you likewise.”

“Here is an expedition admirably commenced!” said Athos to his son. “No
provisions--no store flotilla! What can be done, thus?”

“Humph!” murmured Raoul; “if all are going to do as I am, provisions
will not be wanted.”

“Monsieur,” replied Athos, sternly, “do not be unjust and senseless in
your egotism, or your grief, whichever you please to call it. If you set
out for this war solely with the intention of getting killed therein,
you stand in need of nobody, and it was scarcely worth while to
recommend you to M de Beaufort. But when you have been introduced to
the prime commandant--when you have accepted the responsibility of a
post in his army, the question is no longer about _you_, but about all
those poor soldiers, who, as well as you, have hearts and bodies, who
will weep for their country and endure all the necessities of their
condition. Remember, Raoul, that officers are ministers as useful to the
world as priests, and that they ought to have more charity.”

“Monsieur, I know it and have practiced it; I would have continued to do
so still, but--”

“You forget also that you are of a country that is proud of its military
glory; go and die if you like, but do not die without honor and without
advantage to France. Cheer up, Raoul! do not let my words grieve you; I
love you, and wish to see you perfect.”

“I love your reproaches, monsieur,” said the young man, mildly; “they
alone may cure me, because they prove to me that some one loves me
still.”

“And now, Raoul, let us be off; the weather is so fine, the heavens so
clear, those heavens which we always find above our heads, which you
will see more clear still at Gigelli, and which will speak to you of me
there, as they speak to me here of God.”

The two gentlemen, after having agreed on this point, talked over the
wild freaks of the duke, convinced that France would be served in a very
incomplete manner, as regarded both spirit and practice, in the ensuing
expedition; and having summed up the ducal policy under the one word
vanity, they set forward, in obedience rather to their will than
destiny. The sacrifice was half accomplished.



CHAPTER XXXI.
The Silver Dish.

The journey passed off pretty well. Athos and his son traversed France
at the rate of fifteen leagues per day; sometimes more, sometimes less,
according to the intensity of Raoul’s grief. It took them a fortnight
to reach Toulon, and they lost all traces of D’Artagnan at Antibes. They
were forced to believe that the captain of the musketeers was desirous
of preserving an incognito on his route, for Athos derived from
his inquiries an assurance that such a cavalier as he described had
exchanged his horse for a well-closed carriage on quitting Avignon.
Raoul was much affected at not meeting with D’Artagnan. His affectionate
heart longed to take a farewell and received consolation from that heart
of steel. Athos knew from experience that D’Artagnan became impenetrable
when engaged in any serious affair, whether on his own account or on the
service of the king. He even feared to offend his friend, or thwart him
by too pressing inquiries. And yet when Raoul commenced his labor of
classing the flotilla, and got together the _chalands_ and lighters to
send them to Toulon, one of the fishermen told the comte that his boat
had been laid up to refit since a trip he had made on account of a
gentleman who was in great haste to embark. Athos, believing that this
man was telling a falsehood in order to be left at liberty to fish,
and so gain more money when all his companions were gone, insisted upon
having the details. The fisherman informed him that six days previously,
a man had come in the night to hire his boat, for the purpose of
visiting the island of St. Honnorat. The price was agreed upon, but the
gentleman had arrived with an immense carriage case, which he insisted
upon embarking, in spite of the many difficulties that opposed the
operation. The fisherman wished to retract. He had even threatened,
but his threats had procured him nothing but a shower of blows from the
gentleman’s cane, which fell upon his shoulders sharp and long. Swearing
and grumbling, he had recourse to the syndic of his brotherhood at
Antibes, who administer justice among themselves and protect each other;
but the gentleman had exhibited a certain paper, at sight of which
the syndic, bowing to the very ground, enjoined obedience from the
fisherman, and abused him for having been refractory. They then departed
with the freight.

“But all this does not tell us,” said Athos, “how you injured your
boat.”

“This is the way. I was steering towards St. Honnorat as the gentleman
desired me; but he changed his mind, and pretended that I could not pass
to the south of the abbey.”

“And why not?”

“Because, monsieur, there is in front of the square tower of the
Benedictines, towards the southern point, the bank of the _Moines_.”

“A rock?” asked Athos.

“Level with the water, but below water; a dangerous passage, yet one I
have cleared a thousand times; the gentleman required me to land him at
Sainte-Marguerite’s.”

“Well?”

“Well, monsieur!” cried the fisherman, with his _Provencal_ accent, “a
man is a sailor, or he is not; he knows his course, or he is nothing but
a fresh-water lubber. I was obstinate, and wished to try the channel.
The gentleman took me by the collar, and told me quietly he would
strangle me. My mate armed himself with a hatchet, and so did I. We had
the affront of the night before to pay him out for. But the gentleman
drew his sword, and used it in such an astonishingly rapid manner, that
we neither of us could get near him. I was about to hurl my hatchet at
his head, and I had a right to do so, hadn’t I, monsieur? for a sailor
aboard is master, as a citizen is in his chamber; I was going, then, in
self-defense, to cut the gentleman in two, when, all at once--believe me
or not, monsieur--the great carriage case opened of itself, I don’t know
how, and there came out of it a sort of a phantom, his head covered with
a black helmet and a black mask, something terrible to look upon, which
came towards me threatening with its fist.”

“And that was--” said Athos.

“That was the devil, monsieur; for the gentleman, with great glee, cried
out, on seeing him: ‘Ah! thank you, monseigneur!’”

“A most strange story!” murmured the comte, looking at Raoul.

“And what did you do?” asked the latter of the fisherman.

“You must know, monsieur, that two poor men, such as we are, could be
no match for two gentlemen; but when one of them turned out to be the
devil, we had no earthly chance! My companion and I did not stop to
consult one another; we made but one jump into the sea, for we were
within seven or eight hundred feet of the shore.”

“Well, and then?”

“Why, and then, monseigneur, as there was a little wind from the
southwest, the boat drifted into the sands of Sainte-Marguerite’s.”

“Oh!--but the travelers?”

“Bah! you need not be uneasy about them! It was pretty plain that one
was the devil, and protected the other; for when we recovered the boat,
after she got afloat again, instead of finding these two creatures
injured by the shock, we found nothing, not even the carriage or the
case.”

“Very strange! very strange!” repeated the comte. “But after that, what
did you do, my friend?”

“I made my complaint to the governor of Sainte-Marguerite’s, who brought
my finger under my nose by telling me if I plagued him with such silly
stories he would have me flogged.”

“What! did the governor himself say so?”

“Yes, monsieur; and yet my boat was injured, seriously injured, for the
prow is left upon the point of Sainte-Marguerite’s, and the carpenter
asks a hundred and twenty livres to repair it.”

“Very well,” replied Raoul; “you will be exempted from the service. Go.”

“We will go to Sainte-Marguerite’s, shall we?” said the comte to
Bragelonne, as the man walked away.

“Yes, monsieur, for there is something to be cleared up; that man does
not seem to me to have told the truth.”

“Nor to me either, Raoul. The story of the masked man and the carriage
having disappeared, may be told to conceal some violence these fellows
have committed upon their passengers in the open sea, to punish him for
his persistence in embarking.”

“I formed the same suspicion; the carriage was more likely to contain
property than a man.”

“We shall see to that, Raoul. The gentleman very much resembles
D’Artagnan; I recognize his methods of proceeding. Alas! we are no
longer the young invincibles of former days. Who knows whether the
hatchet or the iron bar of this miserable coaster has not succeeded in
doing that which the best blades of Europe, balls, and bullets have not
been able to do in forty years?”

That same day they set out for Sainte-Marguerite’s, on board a
_chasse-maree_ come from Toulon under orders. The impression they
experienced on landing was a singularly pleasing one. The island seemed
loaded with flowers and fruits. In its cultivated part it served as a
garden for the governor. Orange, pomegranate, and fig trees bent beneath
the weight of their golden or purple fruits. All round this garden, in
the uncultivated parts, red partridges ran about in conveys among the
brambles and tufts of junipers, and at every step of the comte and Raoul
a terrified rabbit quitted his thyme and heath to scuttle away to the
burrow. In fact, this fortunate isle was uninhabited. Flat, offering
nothing but a tiny bay for the convenience of embarkation, and under the
protection of the governor, who went shares with them, smugglers made
use of it as a provisional _entrepot_, at the expense of not killing the
game or devastating the garden. With this compromise, the governor was
in a situation to be satisfied with a garrison of eight men to guard his
fortress, in which twelve cannons accumulated coats of moldy green. The
governor was a sort of happy farmer, harvesting wines, figs, oil,
and oranges, preserving his citrons and _cedrates_ in the sun of his
casemates. The fortress, encircled by a deep ditch, its only guardian,
arose like three heads upon turrets connected with each other by
terraces covered with moss.

Athos and Raoul wandered for some time round the fences of the garden
without finding any one to introduce them to the governor. They ended by
making their own way into the garden. It was at the hottest time of
the day. Each living thing sought its shelter under grass or stone. The
heavens spread their fiery veils as if to stifle all noises, to envelop
all existences; the rabbit under the broom, the fly under the leaf,
slept as the wave did beneath the heavens. Athos saw nothing living but
a soldier, upon the terrace beneath the second and third court, who was
carrying a basket of provisions on his head. This man returned almost
immediately without his basket, and disappeared in the shade of his
sentry-box. Athos supposed he must have been carrying dinner to some
one, and, after having done so, returned to dine himself. All at once
they heard some one call out, and raising their heads, perceived in the
frame of the bars of the window something of a white color, like a
hand that was waved backwards and forwards--something shining, like a
polished weapon struck by the rays of the sun. And before they were able
to ascertain what it was, a luminous train, accompanied by a hissing
sound in the air, called their attention from the donjon to the ground.
A second dull noise was heard from the ditch, and Raoul ran to pick up
a silver plate which was rolling along the dry sand. The hand that
had thrown this plate made a sign to the two gentlemen, and then
disappeared. Athos and Raoul, approaching each other, commenced an
attentive examination of the dusty plate, and they discovered, in
characters traced upon the bottom of it with the point of a knife, this
inscription:

“_I am the brother of the king of France--a prisoner to-day--a madman
to-morrow. French gentlemen and Christians, pray to God for the soul and
the reason of the son of your old rulers_.”

The plate fell from the hands of Athos whilst Raoul was endeavoring
to make out the meaning of these dismal words. At the same moment they
heard a cry from the top of the donjon. Quick as lightning Raoul
bent down his head, and forced down that of his father likewise. A
musket-barrel glittered from the crest of the wall. A white smoke
floated like a plume from the mouth of the musket, and a ball was
flattened against a stone within six inches of the two gentlemen.

“_Cordieu!_” cried Athos. “What, are people assassinated here? Come
down, cowards as you are!”

“Yes, come down!” cried Raoul, furiously shaking his fist at the castle.

One of the assailants--he who was about to fire--replied to these cries
by an exclamation of surprise; and, as his companion, who wished to
continue the attack, had re-seized his loaded musket, he who had cried
out threw up the weapon, and the ball flew into the air. Athos and
Raoul, seeing them disappear from the platform, expected they would
come down to them, and waited with a firm demeanor. Five minutes had
not elapsed, when a stroke upon a drum called the eight soldiers of the
garrison to arms, and they showed themselves on the other side of
the ditch with their muskets in hand. At the head of these men was an
officer, whom Athos and Raoul recognized as the one who had fired the
first musket. The man ordered the soldiers to “make ready.”

“We are going to be shot!” cried Raoul; “but, sword in hand, at least,
let us leap the ditch! We shall kill at least two of these scoundrels,
when their muskets are empty.” And, suiting the action to the word,
Raoul was springing forward, followed by Athos, when a well-known voice
resounded behind them, “Athos! Raoul!”

“D’Artagnan!” replied the two gentlemen.

“Recover arms! _Mordioux!_” cried the captain to the soldiers. “I was
sure I could not be mistaken!”

“What is the meaning of this?” asked Athos. “What! were we to be shot
without warning?”

“It was I who was going to shoot you, and if the governor missed you, I
should not have missed you, my dear friends. How fortunate it is that
I am accustomed to take a long aim, instead of firing at the instant I
raise my weapon! I thought I recognized you. Ah! my dear friends, how
fortunate!” And D’Artagnan wiped his brow, for he had run fast, and
emotion with him was not feigned.

“How!” said Athos. “And is the gentleman who fired at us the governor of
the fortress?”

“In person.”

“And why did he fire at us? What have we done to him?”

“_Pardieu!_ You received what the prisoner threw to you?”

“That is true.”

“That plate--the prisoner has written something on it, has he not?”

“Yes.”

“Good heavens! I was afraid he had.”

And D’Artagnan, with all the marks of mortal disquietude, seized the
plate, to read the inscription. When he had read it, a fearful pallor
spread across his countenance. “Oh! good heavens!” repeated he.
“Silence!--Here is the governor.”

“And what will he do to us? Is it our fault?”

“It is true, then?” said Athos, in a subdued voice. “It is true?”

“Silence! I tell you--silence! If he only believes you can read; if he
only suspects you have understood; I love you, my dear friends, I would
willingly be killed for you, but--”

“But--” said Athos and Raoul.

“But I could not save you from perpetual imprisonment if I saved you
from death. Silence, then! Silence again!”

The governor came up, having crossed the ditch upon a plank bridge.

“Well!” said he to D’Artagnan, “what stops us?”

“You are Spaniards--you do not understand a word of French,” said the
captain, eagerly, to his friends in a low voice.

“Well!” replied he, addressing the governor, “I was right; these
gentlemen are two Spanish captains with whom I was acquainted at Ypres,
last year; they don’t know a word of French.”

“Ah!” said the governor, sharply. “And yet they were trying to read the
inscription on the plate.”

D’Artagnan took it out of his hands, effacing the characters with the
point of his sword.

“How!” cried the governor, “what are you doing? I cannot read them now!”

“It is a state secret,” replied D’Artagnan, bluntly; “and as you know
that, according to the king’s orders, it is under the penalty of death
any one should penetrate it, I will, if you like, allow you to read it,
and have you shot immediately afterwards.”

During this apostrophe--half serious, half ironical--Athos and Raoul
preserved the coolest, most unconcerned silence.

“But, is it possible,” said the governor, “that these gentlemen do not
comprehend at least some words?”

“Suppose they do! If they do understand a few spoken words, it does not
follow that they should understand what is written. They cannot even
read Spanish. A noble Spaniard, remember, ought never to know how to
read.”

The governor was obliged to be satisfied with these explanations, but he
was still tenacious. “Invite these gentlemen to come to the fortress,”
 said he.

“That I will willingly do. I was about to propose it to you.” The
fact is, the captain had quite another idea, and would have wished his
friends a hundred leagues off. But he was obliged to make the best of
it. He addressed the two gentlemen in Spanish, giving them a polite
invitation, which they accepted. They all turned towards the entrance of
the fort, and, the incident being at an end, the eight soldiers returned
to their delightful leisure, for a moment disturbed by this unexpected
adventure.



CHAPTER XXXII.
Captive and Jailers.

When they had entered the fort, and whilst the governor was making some
preparations for the reception of his guests, “Come,” said Athos, “let
us have a word of explanation whilst we are alone.”

“It is simply this,” replied the musketeer. “I have conducted hither a
prisoner, who the king commands shall not be seen. You came here, he
has thrown something to you through the lattice of his window; I was at
dinner with the governor, I saw the object thrown, and I saw Raoul pick
it up. It does not take long to understand this. I understood it, and I
thought you in intelligence with my prisoner. And then--”

“And then--you commanded us to be shot.”

“_Ma foi!_ I admit it; but, if I was the first to seize a musket,
fortunately, I was the last to take aim at you.”

“If you had killed me, D’Artagnan, I should have had the good fortune
to die for the royal house of France, and it would be an honor to die by
your hand--you, its noblest and most loyal defender.”

“What the devil, Athos, do you mean by the royal house?” stammered
D’Artagnan. “You don’t mean that you, a well-informed and sensible man,
can place any faith in the nonsense written by an idiot?”

“I do believe in it.”

“With so much the more reason, my dear chevalier, from your having
orders to kill all those who do believe in it,” said Raoul.

“That is because,” replied the captain of the musketeers--“because every
calumny, however absurd it may be, has the almost certain chance of
becoming popular.”

“No, D’Artagnan,” replied Athos, promptly; “but because the king is not
willing that the secret of his family should transpire among the people,
and cover with shame the executioners of the son of Louis XIII.”

“Do not talk in such a childish manner, Athos, or I shall begin to think
you have lost your senses. Besides, explain to me how it is possible
Louis XIII. should have a son in the Isle of Sainte-Marguerite.”

“A son whom you have brought hither masked, in a fishing-boat,” said
Athos. “Why not?”

D’Artagnan was brought to a pause.

“Oh!” said he; “whence do you know that a fishing-boat--?”

“Brought you to Sainte-Marguerite’s with the carriage containing
the prisoner--with a prisoner whom you styled monseigneur. Oh! I
am acquainted with all that,” resumed the comte. D’Artagnan bit his
mustache.

“If it were true,” said he, “that I had brought hither in a boat and
with a carriage a masked prisoner, nothing proves that this prisoner
must be a prince--a prince of the house of France.”

“Ask Aramis such riddles,” replied Athos, coolly.

“Aramis,” cried the musketeer, quite at a stand. “Have you seen Aramis?”

“After his discomfiture at Vaux, yes; I have seen Aramis, a fugitive,
pursued, bewildered, ruined; and Aramis has told me enough to make me
believe in the complaints this unfortunate young prince cut upon the
bottom of the plate.”

D’Artagnan’s head sunk on his breast in some confusion. “This is the
way,” said he, “in which God turns to nothing that which men call
wisdom! A fine secret must that be of which twelve or fifteen persons
hold the tattered fragments! Athos, cursed be the chance which has
brought you face to face with me in this affair! for now--”

“Well,” said Athos, with his customary mild severity, “is your secret
lost because I know it? Consult your memory, my friend. Have I not borne
secrets heavier than this?”

“You have never borne one so dangerous,” replied D’Artagnan, in a tone
of sadness. “I have something like a sinister idea that all who are
concerned with this secret will die, and die unhappily.”

“The will of God be done!” said Athos, “but here is your governor.”

D’Artagnan and his friends immediately resumed their parts. The
governor, suspicious and hard, behaved towards D’Artagnan with a
politeness almost amounting to obsequiousness. With respect to the
travelers, he contented himself with offering good cheer, and never
taking his eye from them. Athos and Raoul observed that he often tried
to embarrass them by sudden attacks, or to catch them off their guard;
but neither the one nor the other gave him the least advantage. What
D’Artagnan had said was probable, if the governor did not believe it to
be quite true. They rose from the table to repose awhile.

“What is this man’s name? I don’t like the looks of him,” said Athos to
D’Artagnan in Spanish.

“De Saint-Mars,” replied the captain.

“He is, then, I suppose, the prince’s jailer?”

“Eh! how can I tell? I may be kept at Sainte-Marguerite forever.”

“Oh! no, not you!”

“My friend, I am in the situation of a man who finds a treasure in the
midst of a desert. He would like to carry it away, but he cannot; he
would like to leave it, but he dares not. The king will not dare to
recall me, for no one else would serve him as faithfully as I do; he
regrets not having me near him, from being aware that no one would be of
so much service near his person as myself. But it will happen as it may
please God.”

“But,” observed Raoul, “your not being certain proves that your
situation here is provisional, and you will return to Paris?”

“Ask these gentlemen,” interrupted the governor, “what was their purpose
in coming to Saint-Marguerite?”

“They came from learning there was a convent of Benedictines at
Sainte-Honnorat which is considered curious; and from being told there
was excellent shooting in the island.”

“That is quite at their service, as well as yours,” replied Saint-Mars.

D’Artagnan politely thanked him.

“When will they depart?” added the governor.

“To-morrow,” replied D’Artagnan.

M. de Saint-Mars went to make his rounds, and left D’Artagnan alone with
the pretended Spaniards.

“Oh!” exclaimed the musketeer, “here is a life and a society that suits
me very little. I command this man, and he bores me, _mordioux!_ Come,
let us have a shot or two at the rabbits; the walk will be beautiful,
and not fatiguing. The whole island is but a league and a half in
length, with the breadth of a league; a real park. Let us try to amuse
ourselves.”

“As you please, D’Artagnan; not for the sake of amusing ourselves, but
to gain an opportunity for talking freely.”

D’Artagnan made a sign to a soldier, who brought the gentlemen some
guns, and then returned to the fort.

“And now,” said the musketeer, “answer me the question put to you by
that black-looking Saint-Mars: what did you come to do at the Lerin
Isles?”

“To bid you farewell.”

“Bid me farewell! What do you mean by that? Is Raoul going anywhere?”

“Yes.”

“Then I will lay a wager it is with M de Beaufort.”

“With M de Beaufort it is, my dear friend. You always guess correctly.”

“From habit.”

Whilst the two friends were commencing their conversation, Raoul, with
his head hanging down and his heart oppressed, seated himself on a
mossy rock, his gun across his knees, looking at the sea--looking at
the heavens, and listening to the voice of his soul; he allowed the
sportsmen to attain a considerable distance from him. D’Artagnan
remarked his absence.

“He has not recovered the blow?” said he to Athos.

“He is struck to death.”

“Oh! your fears exaggerate, I hope. Raoul is of a tempered nature.
Around all hearts as noble as his, there is a second envelope that forms
a cuirass. The first bleeds, the second resists.”

“No,” replied Athos, “Raoul will die of it.”

“_Mordioux!_” said D’Artagnan, in a melancholy tone. And he did not add
a word to this exclamation. Then, a minute after, “Why do you let him
go?”

“Because he insists on going.”

“And why do you not go with him?”

“Because I could not bear to see him die.”

D’Artagnan looked his friend earnestly in the face. “You know one
thing,” continued the comte, leaning upon the arm of the captain; “you
know that in the course of my life I have been afraid of but few things.
Well! I have an incessant gnawing, insurmountable fear that an hour will
come in which I shall hold the dead body of that boy in my arms.”

“Oh!” murmured D’Artagnan; “oh!”

“He will die, I know, I have a perfect conviction of that; but I would
not see him die.”

“How is this, Athos? you come and place yourself in the presence of the
bravest man, you say you have ever seen, of your own D’Artagnan, of that
man without an equal, as you formerly called him, and you come and tell
him, with your arms folded, that you are afraid of witnessing the death
of your son, you who have seen all that can be seen in this world! Why
have you this fear, Athos? Man upon this earth must expect everything,
and ought to face everything.”

“Listen to me, my friend. After having worn myself out upon this earth
of which you speak, I have preserved but two religions: that of life,
friendship, my duty as a father--that of eternity, love, and respect for
God. Now, I have within me the revelation that if God should decree that
my friend or my son should render up his last sigh in my presence--oh!
no, I cannot even tell you, D’Artagnan!”

“Speak, speak, tell me!”

“I am strong against everything, except against the death of those I
love. For that only there is no remedy. He who dies, gains; he who sees
others die, loses. No, this is it--to know that I should no more meet on
earth him whom I now behold with joy; to know that there would nowhere
be a D’Artagnan any more, nowhere again be a Raoul, oh! I am old, look
you, I have no longer courage; I pray God to spare me in my weakness;
but if he struck me so plainly and in that fashion, I should curse him.
A Christian gentleman ought not to curse his God, D’Artagnan; it is
enough to once have cursed a king!”

“Humph!” sighed D’Artagnan, a little confused by this violent tempest of
grief.

“Let me speak to him, Athos. Who knows?”

“Try, if you please, but I am convinced you will not succeed.”

“I will not attempt to console him. I will serve him.”

“You will?”

“Doubtless, I will. Do you think this would be the first time a woman
had repented of an infidelity? I will go to him, I tell you.”

Athos shook his head, and continued his walk alone, D’Artagnan, cutting
across the brambles, rejoined Raoul and held out his hand to him. “Well,
Raoul! You have something to say to me?”

“I have a kindness to ask of you,” replied Bragelonne.

“Ask it, then.”

“You will some day return to France?”

“I hope so.”

“Ought I to write to Mademoiselle de la Valliere?”

“No, you must not.”

“But I have many things to say to her.”

“Go and say them to her, then.”

“Never!”

“Pray, what virtue do you attribute to a letter, which your speech might
not possess?”

“Perhaps you are right.”

“She loves the king,” said D’Artagnan, bluntly; “and she is an honest
girl.” Raoul started. “And you, you whom she abandons, she, perhaps,
loves better than she does the king, but after another fashion.”

“D’Artagnan, do you believe she loves the king?”

“To idolatry. Her heart is inaccessible to any other feeling. You might
continue to live near her, and would be her best friend.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Raoul, with a passionate burst of repugnance at such a
hideous hope.

“Will you do so?”

“It would be base.”

“That is a very absurd word, which would lead me to think slightly of
your understanding. Please to understand, Raoul, that it is never base
to do that which is imposed upon us by a superior force. If your heart
says to you, ‘Go there, or die,’ why go, Raoul. Was she base or brave,
she whom you loved, in preferring the king to you, the king whom her
heart commanded her imperiously to prefer to you? No, she was the
bravest of women. Do, then, as she has done. Oblige yourself. Do you
know one thing of which I am sure, Raoul?”

“What is that?”

“Why, that by seeing her closely with the eyes of a jealous man--”

“Well?”

“Well! you would cease to love her.”

“Then I am decided, my dear D’Artagnan.”

“To set off to see her again?”

“No; to set off that I may _never_ see her again. I wish to love her
forever.”

“Ha! I must confess,” replied the musketeer, “that is a conclusion which
I was far from expecting.”

“This is what I wish, my friend. You will see her again, and you will
give her a letter which, if you think proper, will explain to her, as to
yourself, what is passing in my heart. Read it; I drew it up last night.
Something told me I should see you to-day.” He held the letter out, and
D’Artagnan read:

“MADEMOISELLE,--You are not wrong in my eyes in not loving me. You have
only been guilty of one fault towards me, that of having left me to
believe you loved me. This error will cost me my life. I pardon you,
but I cannot pardon myself. It is said that happy lovers are deaf to the
sorrows of rejected lovers. It will not be so with you, who did not love
me, save with anxiety. I am sure that if I had persisted in endeavoring
to change that friendship into love, you would have yielded out of a
fear of bringing about my death, or lessening the esteem I had for you.
It is much more delightful to me to die, knowing that _you_ are free
and satisfied. How much, then, will you love me, when you will no
longer fear either my presence or reproaches? You will love me, because,
however charming a new love may appear to you, God has not made me in
anything inferior to him you have chosen, and because my devotedness,
my sacrifice, and my painful end will assure me, in your eyes, a certain
superiority over him. I have allowed to escape, in the candid credulity
of my heart, the treasure I possessed. Many people tell me that you
loved me enough to lead me to hope you would have loved me much. That
idea takes from my mind all bitterness, and leads me only to blame
myself. You will accept this last farewell, and you will bless me
for having taken refuge in the inviolable asylum where hatred is
extinguished, and where all love endures forever. Adieu, mademoiselle.
If your happiness could be purchased by the last drop of my blood, I
would shed that drop. I willingly make the sacrifice of it to my misery!

“RAOUL, VICOTME DE BRAGELONNE.”


“The letter reads very well,” said the captain. “I have only one fault
to find with it.”

“Tell me what that is!” said Raoul.

“Why, it is that it tells everything, except the thing which exhales,
like a mortal poison from your eyes and from your heart; except the
senseless love which still consumes you.” Raoul grew paler, but remained
silent.

“Why did you not write simply these words:

“‘MADEMOISELLE,--Instead of cursing you, I love you and I die.’”

“That is true,” exclaimed Raoul, with a sinister kind of joy.

And tearing the letter he had just taken back, he wrote the following
words upon a leaf of his tablets:

“To procure the happiness of once more telling you I love you, I commit
the baseness of writing to you; and to punish myself for that baseness,
I die.” And he signed it.

“You will give her these tablets, captain, will you not?”

“When?” asked the latter.

“On the day,” said Bragelonne, pointing to the last sentence, “on the
day when you can place a date under these words.” And he sprang away
quickly to join Athos, who was returning with slow steps.

As they re-entered the fort, the sea rose with that rapid, gusty
vehemence which characterizes the Mediterranean; the ill-humor of
the element became a tempest. Something shapeless, and tossed about
violently by the waves, appeared just off the coast.

“What is that?” said Athos,--“a wrecked boat?”

“No, it is not a boat,” said D’Artagnan.

“Pardon me,” said Raoul, “there is a bark gaining the port rapidly.”

“Yes, there is a bark in the creek, which is prudently seeking shelter
here; but that which Athos points to in the sand is not a boat at
all--it has run aground.”

“Yes, yes, I see it.”

“It is the carriage, which I threw into the sea after landing the
prisoner.”

“Well!” said Athos, “if you take my advice, D’Artagnan, you will burn
that carriage, in order that no vestige of it may remain, without which
the fishermen of Antibes, who have believed they had to do with the
devil, will endeavor to prove that your prisoner was but a man.”

“Your advice is good, Athos, and I will this night have it carried out,
or rather, I will carry it out myself; but let us go in, for the rain
falls heavily, and the lightning is terrific.”

As they were passing over the ramparts to a gallery of which D’Artagnan
had the key, they saw M. de Saint-Mars directing his steps towards the
chamber inhabited by the prisoner. Upon a sign from D’Artagnan, they
concealed themselves in an angle of the staircase.

“What is it?” said Athos.

“You will see. Look. The prisoner is returning from chapel.”

And they saw, by the red flashes of lightning against the violet fog
which the wind stamped upon the bank-ward sky, they saw pass gravely,
at six paces behind the governor, a man clothed in black and masked by a
vizor of polished steel, soldered to a helmet of the same nature, which
altogether enveloped the whole of his head. The fire of the heavens cast
red reflections on the polished surface, and these reflections, flying
off capriciously, seemed to be angry looks launched by the unfortunate,
instead of imprecations. In the middle of the gallery, the prisoner
stopped for a moment, to contemplate the infinite horizon, to respire
the sulphurous perfumes of the tempest, to drink in thirstily the hot
rain, and to breathe a sigh resembling a smothered groan.

“Come on, monsieur,” said Saint-Mars, sharply, to the prisoner, for
he already became uneasy at seeing him look so long beyond the walls.
“Monsieur, come on!”

“Say monseigneur!” cried Athos, from his corner, with a voice so solemn
and terrible, that the governor trembled from head to foot. Athos
insisted upon respect being paid to fallen majesty. The prisoner turned
round.

“Who spoke?” asked Saint-Mars.

“It was I,” replied D’Artagnan, showing himself promptly. “You know that
is the order.”

“Call me neither monsieur nor monseigneur,” said the prisoner in his
turn, in a voice that penetrated to the very soul of Raoul; “call me
ACCURSED!” He passed on, and the iron door croaked after him.

“There goes a truly unfortunate man!” murmured the musketeer in a hollow
whisper, pointing out to Raoul the chamber inhabited by the prince.



CHAPTER XXXIII.
Promises.

Scarcely had D’Artagnan re-entered his apartment with his two friends,
when one of the soldiers of the fort came to inform him that the
governor was seeking him. The bark which Raoul had perceived at sea, and
which appeared so eager to gain the port, came to Sainte-Marguerite with
an important dispatch for the captain of the musketeers. On opening it,
D’Artagnan recognized the writing of the king: “I should think,”
 said Louis XIV., “you will have completed the execution of my orders,
Monsieur d’Artagnan; return, then, immediately to Paris, and join me at
the Louvre.”

“There is the end of my exile!” cried the musketeer with joy; “God be
praised, I am no longer a jailer!” And he showed the letter to Athos.

“So, then, you must leave us?” replied the latter, in a melancholy tone.

“Yes, but to meet again, dear friend, seeing that Raoul is old enough
now to go alone with M de Beaufort, and will prefer his father going
back in company with M. d’Artagnan, to forcing him to travel two hundred
leagues solitarily to reach home at La Fere; will you not, Raoul?”

“Certainly,” stammered the latter, with an expression of tender regret.

“No, no, my friend,” interrupted Athos, “I will never quit Raoul till
the day his vessel disappears on the horizon. As long as he remains in
France he shall not be separated from me.”

“As you please, dear friend; but we will, at least, leave
Sainte-Marguerite together; take advantage of the bark that will convey
me back to Antibes.”

“With all my heart; we cannot too soon be at a distance from this fort,
and from the spectacle that shocked us so just now.”

The three friends quitted the little isle, after paying their respects
to the governor, and by the last flashes of the departing tempest they
took their farewell of the white walls of the fort. D’Artagnan parted
from his friend that same night, after having seen fire set to the
carriage upon the shore by the orders of Saint-Mars, according to the
advice the captain had given him. Before getting on horseback, and after
leaving the arms of Athos: “My friends,” said he, “you bear too much
resemblance to two soldiers who are abandoning their post. Something
warns me that Raoul will require being supported by you in his rank.
Will you allow me to ask permission to go over into Africa with a
hundred good muskets? The king will not refuse me, and I will take you
with me.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” replied Raoul, pressing his hand with emotion,
“thanks for that offer, which would give us more than we wish, either
monsieur le comte or I. I, who am young, stand in need of labor of mind
and fatigue of body; monsieur le comte wants the profoundest repose. You
are his best friend. I recommend him to your care. In watching over him,
you are holding both our souls in your hands.”

“I must go; my horse is all in a fret,” said D’Artagnan, with whom
the most manifest sign of a lively emotion was the change of ideas
in conversation. “Come, comte, how many days longer has Raoul to stay
here?”

“Three days at most.”

“And how long will it take you to reach home?”

“Oh! a considerable time,” replied Athos. “I shall not like the idea
of being separated too quickly from Raoul. Time will travel too fast
of itself to require me to aid it by distance. I shall only make
half-stages.”

“And why so, my friend? Nothing is more dull than traveling slowly; and
hostelry life does not become a man like you.”

“My friend, I came hither on post-horses; but I wish to purchase two
animals of a superior kind. Now, to take them home fresh, it would not
be prudent to make them travel more than seven or eight leagues a day.”

“Where is Grimaud?”

“He arrived yesterday morning with Raoul’s appointments; and I have left
him to sleep.”

“That is, never to come back again,” D’Artagnan suffered to escape him.
“Till we meet again, then, dear Athos--and if you are diligent, I shall
embrace you the sooner.” So saying, he put his foot in the stirrup,
which Raoul held.

“Farewell!” said the young man, embracing him.

“Farewell!” said D’Artagnan, as he got into his saddle.

His horse made a movement which divided the cavalier from his friends.
This scene had taken place in front of the house chosen by Athos, near
the gates of Antibes, whither D’Artagnan, after his supper, had ordered
his horses to be brought. The road began to branch off there, white and
undulating in the vapors of the night. The horse eagerly respired the
salt, sharp perfume of the marshes. D’Artagnan put him to a trot; and
Athos and Raoul sadly turned towards the house. All at once they heard
the rapid approach of a horse’s steps, and first believed it to be one
of those singular repercussions which deceive the ear at every turn in
a road. But it was really the return of the horseman. They uttered a
cry of joyous surprise; and the captain, springing to the ground like
a young man, seized within his arms the two beloved heads of Athos and
Raoul. He held them long embraced thus, without speaking a word, or
suffering the sigh which was bursting his breast to escape him. Then, as
rapidly as he had come back, he set off again, with a sharp application
of his spurs to the sides of his fiery horse.

“Alas!” said the comte, in a low voice, “alas! alas!”

“An evil omen!” on his side, said D’Artagnan to himself, making up for
lost time. “I could not smile upon them. An evil omen!”

The next day Grimaud was on foot again. The service commanded by M. de
Beaufort was happily accomplished. The flotilla, sent to Toulon by the
exertions of Raoul, had set out, dragging after it in little nutshells,
almost invisible, the wives and friends of the fishermen and smugglers
put in requisition for the service of the fleet. The time, so short,
which remained for father and son to live together, appeared to go
by with double rapidity, like some swift stream that flows towards
eternity. Athos and Raoul returned to Toulon, which began to be filled
with the noise of carriages, with the noise of arms, the noise of
neighing horses. The trumpeters sounded their spirited marches; the
drummers signalized their strength; the streets were overflowing
with soldiers, servants, and tradespeople. The Duc de Beaufort was
everywhere, superintending the embarkation with the zeal and interest of
a good captain. He encouraged the humblest of his companions; he scolded
his lieutenants, even those of the highest rank. Artillery, provisions,
baggage, he insisted upon seeing all himself. He examined the equipment
of every soldier; assured himself of the health and soundness of every
horse. It was plain that, light, boastful, egotistical, in his hotel,
the gentleman became the soldier again--the high noble, a captain--in
face of the responsibility he had accepted. And yet, it must be admitted
that, whatever was the care with which he presided over the preparations
for departure, it was easy to perceive careless precipitation, and the
absence of all the precaution that make the French soldier the first
soldier in the world, because, in that world, he is the one most
abandoned to his own physical and moral resources. All things having
satisfied, or appearing to have satisfied, the admiral, he paid his
compliments to Raoul, and gave the last orders for sailing, which was
ordered the next morning at daybreak. He invited the comte had his son
to dine with him; but they, under a pretext of service, kept themselves
apart. Gaining their hostelry, situated under the trees of the great
Place, they took their repast in haste, and Athos led Raoul to the
rocks which dominate the city, vast gray mountains, whence the view is
infinite and embraces a liquid horizon which appears, so remote is it,
on a level with the rocks themselves. The night was fine, as it always
is in these happy climes. The moon, rising behind the rocks, unrolled
a silver sheet on the cerulean carpet of the sea. In the roadsteads
maneuvered silently the vessels which had just taken their rank to
facilitate the embarkation. The sea, loaded with phosphoric light,
opened beneath the hulls of the barks that transported the baggage and
munitions; every dip of the prow plowed up this gulf of white flames;
from every oar dropped liquid diamonds. The sailors, rejoicing in the
largesses of the admiral, were heard murmuring their slow and artless
songs. Sometimes the grinding of the chains was mixed with the dull
noise of shot falling into the holds. Such harmonies, such a spectacle,
oppress the heart like fear, and dilate it like hope. All this life
speaks of death. Athos had seated himself with his son, upon the moss,
among the brambles of the promontory. Around their heads passed and
repassed large bats, carried along by the fearful whirl of their blind
chase. The feet of Raoul were over the edge of the cliff, bathed in that
void which is peopled by vertigo, and provokes to self-annihilation.
When the moon had risen to its fullest height, caressing with light
the neighboring peaks, when the watery mirror was illumined in its full
extent, and the little red fires had made their openings in the black
masses of every ship, Athos, collecting all his ideas and all his
courage, said:

“God has made all these things that we see, Raoul; He has made us
also,--poor atoms mixed up with this monstrous universe. We shine like
those fires and those stars; we sigh like those waves; we suffer like
those great ships, which are worn out in plowing the waves, in obeying
the wind that urges them towards an end, as the breath of God blows us
towards a port. Everything likes to live, Raoul; and everything seems
beautiful to living things.”

“Monsieur,” said Raoul, “we have before us a beautiful spectacle!”

“How good D’Artagnan is!” interrupted Athos, suddenly, “and what a rare
good fortune it is to be supported during a whole life by such a friend
as he is! That is what you have missed, Raoul.”

“A friend!” cried Raoul, “I have wanted a friend!”

“M. de Guiche is an agreeable companion,” resumed the comte, coldly,
“but I believe, in the times in which you live, men are more engaged in
their own interests and their own pleasures than they were in ours. You
have sought a secluded life; that is a great happiness, but you have
lost your strength thereby. We four, more weaned from those delicate
abstractions that constitute your joy, furnished much more resistance
when misfortune presented itself.”

“I have not interrupted you, monsieur, to tell you that I had a friend,
and that that friend is M. de Guiche. _Certes_, he is good and generous,
and moreover he loves me. But I have lived under the guardianship of
another friendship, monsieur, as precious and as strong as that of which
you speak, since it is yours.”

“I have not been a friend for you, Raoul,” said Athos.

“Eh! monsieur, and in what respect not?”

“Because I have given you reason to think that life has but one face,
because, sad and severe, alas! I have always cut off for you, without,
God knows, wishing to do so, the joyous buds that spring incessantly
from the fair tree of youth; so that at this moment I repent of not
having made of you a more expansive, dissipated, animated man.”

“I know why you say that, monsieur. No, it is not you who have made me
what I am; it was love, which took me at the time when children only
have inclinations; it is the constancy natural to my character, which
with other creatures is but habit. I believed that I should always be as
I was; I thought God had cast me in a path quite clear, quite straight,
bordered with fruits and flowers. I had ever watching over me your
vigilance and strength. I believed myself to be vigilant and strong.
Nothing prepared me; I fell once, and that once deprived me of courage
for the whole of my life. It is quite true that I wrecked myself. Oh,
no, monsieur! you are nothing in my past but happiness--in my future but
hope! No, I have no reproach to make against life such as you made it
for me; I bless you, and I love you ardently.”

“My dear Raoul, your words do me good. They prove to me that you will
act a little for me in the time to come.”

“I shall only act for you, monsieur.”

“Raoul, what I have never hitherto done with respect to you, I will
henceforward do. I will be your friend, not your father. We will live in
expanding ourselves, instead of living and holding ourselves prisoners,
when you come back. And that will be soon, will it not?”

“Certainly, monsieur, for such an expedition cannot last long.”

“Soon, then, Raoul, soon, instead of living moderately on my income, I
will give you the capital of my estates. It will suffice for launching
you into the world till my death; and you will give me, I hope, before
that time, the consolation of not seeing my race extinct.”

“I will do all you may command,” said Raoul, much agitated.

“It is not necessary, Raoul, that your duty as aide-de-camp should lead
you into too hazardous enterprises. You have gone through your ordeal;
you are known to be a true man under fire. Remember that war with Arabs
is a war of snares, ambuscades, and assassinations.”

“So it is said, monsieur.”

“There is never much glory in falling in an ambuscade. It is a death
which always implies a little rashness or want of foresight. Often,
indeed, he who falls in one meets with but little pity. Those who are
not pitied, Raoul, have died to little purpose. Still further, the
conqueror laughs, and we Frenchmen ought not to allow stupid infidels to
triumph over our faults. Do you clearly understand what I am saying to
you, Raoul? God forbid I should encourage you to avoid encounters.”

“I am naturally prudent, monsieur, and I have very good fortune,” said
Raoul, with a smile which chilled the heart of his poor father; “for,”
 the young man hastened to add, “in twenty combats through which I have
been, I have only received one scratch.”

“There is in addition,” said Athos, “the climate to be dreaded: that is
an ugly end, to die of fever! King Saint-Louis prayed God to send him an
arrow or the plague, rather than the fever.”

“Oh, monsieur! with sobriety, with reasonable exercise--”

“I have already obtained from M de Beaufort a promise that his
dispatches shall be sent off every fortnight to France. You, as his
aide-de-camp, will be charged with expediting them, and will be sure not
to forget me.”

“No, monsieur,” said Raoul, almost choked with emotion.

“Besides, Raoul, as you are a good Christian, and I am one also, we
ought to reckon upon a more special protection of God and His guardian
angels. Promise me that if anything evil should happen to you, on any
occasion, you will think of me at once.”

“First and at once! Oh! yes, monsieur.”

“And will call upon me?”

“Instantly.”

“You dream of me sometimes, do you not, Raoul?”

“Every night, monsieur. During my early youth I saw you in my dreams,
calm and mild, with one hand stretched out over my head, and that it was
which made me sleep so soundly--formerly.”

“We love each other too dearly,” said the comte, “that from this moment,
in which we separate, a portion of both our souls should not travel with
one and the other of us, and should not dwell wherever we may dwell.
Whenever you may be sad, Raoul, I feel that my heart will be dissolved
in sadness; and when you smile on thinking of me, be assured you will
send me, from however remote a distance, a vital scintillation of your
joy.”

“I will not promise you to be joyous,” replied the young man; “but you
may be certain that I will never pass an hour without thinking of you,
not one hour, I swear, unless I shall be dead.”

Athos could contain himself no longer; he threw his arm round the neck
of his son, and held him embraced with all the power of his heart. The
moon began to be now eclipsed by twilight; a golden band surrounded the
horizon, announcing the approach of the day. Athos threw his cloak over
the shoulders of Raoul, and led him back to the city, where burdens and
porters were already in motion, like a vast ant-hill. At the extremity
of the plateau which Athos and Bragelonne were quitting, they saw a dark
shadow moving uneasily backwards and forwards, as if in indecision or
ashamed to be seen. It was Grimaud, who in his anxiety had tracked his
master, and was there awaiting him.

“Oh! my good Grimaud,” cried Raoul, “what do you want? You are come to
tell us it is time to be gone, have you not?”

“Alone?” said Grimaud, addressing Athos and pointing to Raoul in a tone
of reproach, which showed to what an extent the old man was troubled.

“Oh! you are right!” cried the comte. “No, Raoul shall not go alone; no,
he shall not be left alone in a strange land without some friendly hand
to support him, some friendly heart to recall to him all he loved!”

“I?” said Grimaud.

“You, yes, you!” cried Raoul, touched to the inmost heart.

“Alas!” said Athos, “you are very old, my good Grimaud.”

“So much the better,” replied the latter, with an inexpressible depth of
feeling and intelligence.

“But the embarkation is begun,” said Raoul, “and you are not prepared.”

“Yes,” said Grimaud, showing the keys of his trunks, mixed with those of
his young master.

“But,” again objected Raoul, “you cannot leave monsieur le comte thus
alone; monsieur le comte, whom you have never quitted?”

Grimaud turned his diamond eyes upon Athos and Raoul, as if to measure
the strength of both. The comte uttered not a word.

“Monsieur le comte prefers my going,” said Grimaud.

“I do,” said Athos, by an inclination of the head.

At that moment the drums suddenly rolled, and the clarions filled
the air with their inspiring notes. The regiments destined for the
expedition began to debouch from the city. They advanced to the number
of five, each composed of forty companies. Royals marched first,
distinguished by their white uniform, faced with blue. The _ordonnance_
colors, quartered cross-wise, violet and dead leaf, with a sprinkling
of golden _fleurs-de-lis_, left the white-colored flag, with its
_fleur-de-lised_ cross, to dominate the whole. Musketeers at the wings,
with their forked sticks and their muskets on their shoulders; pikemen
in the center, with their lances, fourteen feet in length, marched gayly
towards the transports, which carried them in detail to the ships. The
regiments of Picardy, Navarre, Normandy, and Royal Vaisseau, followed
after. M de Beaufort had known well how to select his troops. He
himself was seen closing the march with his staff--it would take a full
hour before he could reach the sea. Raoul with Athos turned his steps
slowly towards the beach, in order to take his place when the prince
embarked. Grimaud, boiling with the ardor of a young man, superintended
the embarkation of Raoul’s baggage in the admiral’s vessel. Athos, with
his arm passed through that of the son he was about to lose, absorbed
in melancholy meditation, was deaf to every noise around him. An officer
came quickly towards them to inform Raoul that M de Beaufort was
anxious to have him by his side.

“Have the kindness to tell the prince,” said Raoul, “that I request he
will allow me this hour to enjoy the company of my father.”

“No, no,” said Athos, “an aide-de-camp ought not thus to quit his
general. Please to tell the prince, monsieur, that the vicomte will join
him immediately.” The officer set off at a gallop.

“Whether we part here or part there,” added the comte, “it is no less
a separation.” He carefully brushed the dust from his son’s coat, and
passed his hand over his hair as they walked along. “But, Raoul,” said
he, “you want money. M de Beaufort’s train will be splendid, and I am
certain it will be agreeable to you to purchase horses and arms, which
are very dear things in Africa. Now, as you are not actually in the
service of the king or M de Beaufort, and are simply a volunteer, you
must not reckon upon either pay or largesse. But I should not like you
to want for anything at Gigelli. Here are two hundred pistoles; if you
would please me, Raoul, spend them.”

Raoul pressed the hand of his father, and, at the turning of a street,
they saw M de Beaufort, mounted on a magnificent white _genet_, which
responded by graceful curvets to the applause of the women of the city.
The duke called Raoul, and held out his hand to the comte. He spoke to
him for some time, with such a kindly expression that the heart of the
poor father even felt a little comforted. It was, however, evident to
both father and son that their walk amounted to nothing less than a
punishment. There was a terrible moment--that at which, on quitting the
sands of the shore, the soldiers and sailors exchanged the last
kisses with their families and friends; a supreme moment, in which,
notwithstanding the clearness of the heavens, the warmth of the sun, of
the perfumes of the air, and the rich life that was circulating in their
veins, everything appeared black, everything bitter, everything created
doubts of Providence, nay, at the most, of God. It was customary for
the admiral and his suite to embark last; the cannon waited to announce,
with its formidable voice, that the leader had placed his foot on board
his vessel. Athos, forgetful of both the admiral and the fleet, and of
his own dignity as a strong man, opened his arms to his son, and pressed
him convulsively to his heart.

“Accompany us on board,” said the duke, very much affected; “you will
gain a good half-hour.”

“No,” said Athos, “my farewell has been spoken, I do not wish to voice a
second.”

“Then, vicomte, embark--embark quickly!” added the prince, wishing
to spare the tears of these two men, whose hearts were bursting. And
paternally, tenderly, very much as Porthos might have done, he took
Raoul in his arms and placed him in the boat, the oars of which, at a
signal, immediately were dipped in the waves. He himself, forgetful of
ceremony, jumped into his boat, and pushed it off with a vigorous foot.
“Adieu!” cried Raoul.

Athos replied only by a sign, but he felt something burning on his hand:
it was the respectful kiss of Grimaud--the last farewell of the faithful
dog. This kiss given, Grimaud jumped from the step of the mole upon
the stem of a two-oared yawl, which had just been taken in tow by a
_chaland_ served by twelve galley-oars. Athos seated himself on the
mole, stunned, deaf, abandoned. Every instant took from him one of the
features, one of the shades of the pale face of his son. With his arms
hanging down, his eyes fixed, his mouth open, he remained confounded
with Raoul--in one same look, in one same thought, in one same stupor.
The sea, by degrees, carried away boats and faces to that distance at
which men become nothing but points,--loves, nothing but remembrances.
Athos saw his son ascend the ladder of the admiral’s ship, he saw him
lean upon the rail of the deck, and place himself in such a manner as
to be always an object in the eye of his father. In vain the cannon
thundered, in vain from the ship sounded the long and lordly tumult,
responded to by immense acclamations from the shore; in vain did the
noise deafen the ear of the father, the smoke obscured the cherished
object of his aspirations. Raoul appeared to him to the last moment; and
the imperceptible atom, passing from black to pale, from pale to white,
from white to nothing, disappeared for Athos--disappeared very long
after, to all the eyes of the spectators, had disappeared both gallant
ships and swelling sails. Towards midday, when the sun devoured space,
and scarcely the tops of the masts dominated the incandescent limit of
the sea, Athos perceived a soft aerial shadow rise, and vanish as soon
as seen. This was the smoke of a cannon, which M de Beaufort ordered to
be fired as a last salute to the coast of France. The point was buried
in its turn beneath the sky, and Athos returned with slow and painful
step to his deserted hostelry.



CHAPTER XXXIV.
Among Women.

D’Artagnan had not been able to hide his feelings from his friends
so much as he would have wished. The stoical soldier, the impassive
man-at-arms, overcome by fear and sad presentiments, had yielded, for
a few moments, to human weakness. When, therefore, he had silenced
his heart and calmed the agitation of his nerves, turning towards his
lackey, a silent servant, always listening, in order to obey the more
promptly:

“Rabaud,” said he, “mind, we must travel thirty leagues a day.”

“At your pleasure, captain,” replied Rabaud.

And from that moment, D’Artagnan, accommodating his action to the pace
of the horse, like a true centaur, gave up his thoughts to nothing--that
is to say, to everything. He asked himself why the king had sent for
him back; why the Iron Mask had thrown the silver plate at the feet of
Raoul. As to the first subject, the reply was negative; he knew right
well that the king’s calling him was from necessity. He still further
knew that Louis XIV. must experience an imperious desire for a private
conversation with one whom the possession of such a secret placed on a
level with the highest powers of the kingdom. But as to saying exactly
what the king’s wish was, D’Artagnan found himself completely at a loss.
The musketeer had no doubts, either, upon the reason which had urged the
unfortunate Philippe to reveal his character and birth. Philippe, buried
forever beneath a mask of steel, exiled to a country where the men
seemed little more than slaves of the elements; Philippe, deprived
even of the society of D’Artagnan, who had loaded him with honors and
delicate attentions, had nothing more to see than odious specters in
this world, and, despair beginning to devour him, he poured himself
forth in complaints, in the belief that his revelations would raise up
some avenger for him. The manner in which the musketeer had been near
killing his two best friends, the destiny which had so strangely brought
Athos to participate in the great state secret, the farewell of Raoul,
the obscurity of the future which threatened to end in a melancholy
death; all this threw D’Artagnan incessantly back on lamentable
predictions and forebodings, which the rapidity of his pace did not
dissipate, as it used formerly to do. D’Artagnan passed from these
considerations to the remembrance of the proscribed Porthos and Aramis.
He saw them both, fugitives, tracked, ruined--laborious architects of
fortunes they had lost; and as the king called for his man of execution
in hours of vengeance and malice, D’Artagnan trembled at the very
idea of receiving some commission that would make his very soul bleed.
Sometimes, ascending hills, when the winded horse breathed hard from his
red nostrils, and heaved his flanks, the captain, left to more freedom
of thought, reflected on the prodigious genius of Aramis, a genius of
acumen and intrigue, a match to which the Fronde and the civil war had
produced but twice. Soldier, priest, diplomatist; gallant, avaricious,
cunning; Aramis had never taken the good things of this life except
as stepping-stones to rise to giddier ends. Generous in spirit, if not
lofty in heart, he never did ill but for the sake of shining even
yet more brilliantly. Towards the end of his career, at the moment of
reaching the goal, like the patrician Fuscus, he had made a false step
upon a plank, and had fallen into the sea. But Porthos, good, harmless
Porthos! To see Porthos hungry, to see Mousqueton without gold lace,
imprisoned, perhaps; to see Pierrefonds, Bracieux, razed to the very
stones, dishonored even to the timber,--these were so many poignant
griefs for D’Artagnan, and every time that one of these griefs struck
him, he bounded like a horse at the sting of a gadfly beneath the vaults
of foliage where he has sought shady shelter from the burning sun. Never
was the man of spirit subjected to _ennui_, if his body was exposed to
fatigue; never did the man of healthy body fail to find life light, if
he had something to engage his mind. D’Artagnan, riding fast, thinking
as constantly, alighted from his horse in Pairs, fresh and tender in
his muscles as the athlete preparing for the gymnasium. The king did not
expect him so soon, and had just departed for the chase towards Meudon.
D’Artagnan, instead of riding after the king, as he would formerly have
done, took off his boots, had a bath, and waited till his majesty
should return dusty and tired. He occupied the interval of five hours
in taking, as people say, the air of the house, and in arming himself
against all ill chances. He learned that the king, during the last
fortnight, had been gloomy; that the queen-mother was ill and much
depressed; that Monsieur, the king’s brother, was exhibiting a
devotional turn; that Madame had the vapors; and that M. de Guiche was
gone to one of his estates. He learned that M. Colbert was radiant; that
M. Fouquet consulted a fresh physician every day, who still did not cure
him, and that his principal complaint was one which physicians do not
usually cure, unless they are political physicians. The king, D’Artagnan
was told, behaved in the kindest manner to M. Fouquet, and did not allow
him to be ever out of his sight; but the surintendant, touched to the
heart, like one of those fine trees a worm has punctured, was declining
daily, in spite of the royal smile, that sun of court trees. D’Artagnan
learned that Mademoiselle de la Valliere had become indispensable to the
king; that the king, during his sporting excursions, if he did not take
her with him, wrote to her frequently, no longer verses, but, which
was much worse, prose, and that whole pages at a time. Thus, as the
political Pleiad of the day said, the _first king in the world_ was seen
descending from his horse _with an ardor beyond compare_, and on the
crown of his hat scrawling bombastic phrases, which M. de Saint-Aignan,
aide-de-camp in perpetuity, carried to La Valliere at the risk of
foundering his horses. During this time, deer and pheasants were left to
the free enjoyment of their nature, hunted so lazily that, it was said,
the art of venery ran great risk of degenerating at the court of France.
D’Artagnan then thought of the wishes of poor Raoul, of that desponding
letter destined for a woman who passed her life in hoping, and as
D’Artagnan loved to philosophize a little occasionally, he resolved
to profit by the absence of the king to have a minute’s talk with
Mademoiselle de la Valliere. This was a very easy affair; while the king
was hunting, Louise was walking with some other ladies in one of
the galleries of the Palais Royal, exactly where the captain of the
musketeers had some guards to inspect. D’Artagnan did not doubt that,
if he could but open the conversation on Raoul, Louise might give him
grounds for writing a consolatory letter to the poor exile; and hope,
or at least consolation for Raoul, in the state of heart in which he had
left him, was the sun, was life to two men, who were very dear to our
captain. He directed his course, therefore, to the spot where he knew
he should find Mademoiselle de la Valliere. D’Artagnan found La Valliere
the center of the circle. In her apparent solitude, the king’s favorite
received, like a queen, more, perhaps, than the queen, a homage of which
Madame had been so proud, when all the king’s looks were directed to her
and commanded the looks of the courtiers. D’Artagnan, although no squire
of dames, received, nevertheless, civilities and attentions from the
ladies; he was polite, as a brave man always is, and his terrible
reputation had conciliated as much friendship among the men as
admiration among the women. On seeing him enter, therefore, they
immediately accosted him; and, as is not unfrequently the case with fair
ladies, opened the attack by questions. “Where _had_ he been? What _had_
become of him so long? Why had they not seen him as usual make his fine
horse curvet in such beautiful style, to the delight and astonishment of
the curious from the king’s balcony?”

He replied that he had just come from the land of oranges. This set all
the ladies laughing. Those were times in which everybody traveled, but
in which, notwithstanding, a journey of a hundred leagues was a problem
often solved by death.

“From the land of oranges?” cried Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente. “From
Spain?”

“Eh! eh!” said the musketeer.

“From Malta?” echoed Montalais.

“_Ma foi!_ You are coming very near, ladies.”

“Is it an island?” asked La Valliere.

“Mademoiselle,” said D’Artagnan; “I will not give you the trouble of
seeking any further; I come from the country where M de Beaufort is, at
this moment, embarking for Algiers.”

“Have you seen the army?” asked several warlike fair ones.

“As plainly as I see you,” replied D’Artagnan.

“And the fleet?”

“Yes, I saw everything.”

“Have we any of us any friends there?” said Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente, coldly, but in a manner to attract attention to a
question that was not without its calculated aim.

“Why,” replied D’Artagnan, “yes; there were M. de la Guillotiere, M. de
Manchy, M. de Bragelonne--”

La Valliere became pale. “M. de Bragelonne!” cried the perfidious
Athenais. “Eh, what!--is he gone to the wars?--he!”

Montalais trod on her toe, but all in vain.

“Do you know what my opinion is?” continued she, addressing D’Artagnan.

“No, mademoiselle; but I should like very much to know it.”

“My opinion is, then, that all the men who go to this war are desperate,
desponding men, whom love has treated ill; and who go to try if they
cannot find jet-complexioned women more kind than fair ones have been.”

Some of the ladies laughed; La Valliere was evidently confused;
Montalais coughed loud enough to waken the dead.

“Mademoiselle,” interrupted D’Artagnan, “you are in error when you speak
of black women at Gigelli; the women there have not jet faces; it is
true they are not white--they are yellow.”

“Yellow!” exclaimed the bevy of fair beauties.

“Eh! do not disparage it. I have never seen a finer color to match with
black eyes and a coral mouth.”

“So much the better for M. de Bragelonne,” said Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente, with persistent malice. “He will make amends for his
loss. Poor fellow!”

A profound silence followed these words; and D’Artagnan had time to
observe and reflect that women--mild doves--treat each other more
cruelly than tigers. But making La Valliere pale did not satisfy
Athenais; she determined to make her blush likewise. Resuming the
conversation without pause, “Do you know, Louise,” said she, “that there
is a great sin on your conscience?”

“What sin, mademoiselle?” stammered the unfortunate girl, looking round
her for support, without finding it.

“Eh!--why,” continued Athenais, “the poor young man was affianced to
you; he loved you; you cast him off.”

“Well, that is a right which every honest woman has,” said Montalais, in
an affected tone. “When we know we cannot constitute the happiness of a
man, it is much better to cast him off.”

“Cast him off! or refuse him!--that’s all very well,” said Athenais,
“but that is not the sin Mademoiselle de la Valliere has to reproach
herself with. The actual sin is sending poor Bragelonne to the wars; and
to wars in which death is so very likely to be met with.” Louise pressed
her hand over her icy brow. “And if he dies,” continued her pitiless
tormentor, “you will have killed him. That is the sin.”

Louise, half-dead, caught at the arm of the captain of the musketeers,
whose face betrayed unusual emotion. “You wished to speak with me,
Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said she, in a voice broken by anger and pain.
“What had you to say to me?”

D’Artagnan made several steps along the gallery, holding Louise on his
arm; then, when they were far enough removed from the others--“What
I had to say to you, mademoiselle,” replied he, “Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente has just expressed; roughly and unkindly, it is true but
still in its entirety.”

She uttered a faint cry; pierced to the heart by this new wound, she
went her way, like one of those poor birds which, struck unto death,
seek the shade of the thicket in which to die. She disappeared at one
door, at the moment the king was entering by another. The first glance
of the king was directed towards the empty seat of his mistress. Not
perceiving La Valliere, a frown came over his brow; but as soon as he
saw D’Artagnan, who bowed to him--“Ah! monsieur!” cried he, “you _have_
been diligent! I am much pleased with you.” This was the superlative
expression of royal satisfaction. Many men would have been ready to lay
down their lives for such a speech from the king. The maids of honor and
the courtiers, who had formed a respectful circle round the king on his
entrance, drew back, on observing he wished to speak privately with
his captain of the musketeers. The king led the way out of the gallery,
after having again, with his eyes, sought everywhere for La Valliere,
whose absence he could not account for. The moment they were out of
the reach of curious ears, “Well! Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said he, “the
prisoner?”

“Is in his prison, sire.”

“What did he say on the road?”

“Nothing, sire.”

“What did he do?”

“There was a moment at which the fisherman--who took me in his boat
to Sainte-Marguerite--revolted, and did his best to kill me. The--the
prisoner defended me instead of attempting to fly.”

The king became pale. “Enough!” said he; and D’Artagnan bowed. Louis
walked about his cabinet with hasty steps. “Were you at Antibes,” said
he, “when Monsieur de Beaufort came there?”

“No, sire; I was setting off when monsieur le duc arrived.”

“Ah!” which was followed by a fresh silence. “Whom did you see there?”

“A great many persons,” said D’Artagnan, coolly.

The king perceived he was unwilling to speak. “I have sent for you,
monsieur le capitaine, to desire you to go and prepare my lodgings at
Nantes.”

“At Nantes!” cried D’Artagnan.

“In Bretagne.”

“Yes, sire, it is in Bretagne. Will you majesty make so long a journey
as to Nantes?”

“The States are assembled there,” replied the king. “I have two demands
to make of them: I wish to be there.”

“When shall I set out?” said the captain.

“This evening--to-morrow--to-morrow evening; for you must stand in need
of rest.”

“I have rested, sire.”

“That is well. Then between this and to-morrow evening, when you
please.”

D’Artagnan bowed as if to take his leave; but, perceiving the king
very much embarrassed, “Will you majesty,” said he, stepping two paces
forward, “take the court with you?”

“Certainly I shall.”

“Then you majesty will, doubtless, want the musketeers?” And the eye of
the king sank beneath the penetrating glance of the captain.

“Take a brigade of them,” replied Louis.

“Is that all? Has your majesty no other orders to give me?”

“No--ah--yes.”

“I am all attention, sire.”

“At the castle of Nantes, which I hear is very ill arranged, you will
adopt the practice of placing musketeers at the door of each of the
principal dignitaries I shall take with me.”

“Of the principal?”

“Yes.”

“For instance, at the door of M. de Lyonne?”

“Yes.”

“And that of M. Letellier?”

“Yes.”

“Of M. de Brienne?”

“Yes.”

“And of monsieur le surintendant?”

“Without doubt.”

“Very well, sire. By to-morrow I shall have set out.”

“Oh, yes; but one more word, Monsieur d’Artagnan. At Nantes you will
meet with M. le Duc de Gesvres, captain of the guards. Be sure that
your musketeers are placed before his guards arrive. Precedence always
belongs to the first comer.”

“Yes, sire.”

“And if M. de Gesvres should question you?”

“Question me, sire! Is it likely that M. de Gesvres should question
me?” And the musketeer, turning cavalierly on his heel, disappeared. “To
Nantes!” said he to himself, as he descended from the stairs. “Why did
he not dare to say, from thence to Belle-Isle?”

As he reached the great gates, one of M. Brienne’s clerks came running
after him, exclaiming, “Monsieur d’Artagnan! I beg your pardon--”

“What is the matter, Monsieur Ariste?”

“The king has desired me to give you this order.”

“Upon your cash-box?” asked the musketeer.

“No, monsieur; on that of M. Fouquet.”

D’Artagnan was surprised, but he took the order, which was in the king’s
own writing, and was for two hundred pistoles. “What!” thought he, after
having politely thanked M. Brienne’s clerk, “M. Fouquet is to pay for
the journey, then! _Mordioux!_ that is a bit of pure Louis XI. Why was
not this order on the chest of M. Colbert? He would have paid it with
such joy.” And D’Artagnan, faithful to his principle of never letting
an order at sight get cold, went straight to the house of M. Fouquet, to
receive his two hundred pistoles.



CHAPTER XXXV.
The Last Supper.

The superintendent had no doubt received advice of the approaching
departure, for he was giving a farewell dinner to his friends. From
the bottom to the top of the house, the hurry of the servants bearing
dishes, and the diligence of the _registres_, denoted an approaching
change in offices and kitchen. D’Artagnan, with his order in his hand,
presented himself at the offices, when he was told it was too late
to pay cash, the chest was closed. He only replied: “On the king’s
service.”

The clerk, a little put out by the serious air of the captain, replied,
that “that was a very respectable reason, but that the customs of the
house were respectable likewise; and that, in consequence, he begged the
bearer to call again next day.” D’Artagnan asked if he could not see
M. Fouquet. The clerk replied that M. le surintendant did not interfere
with such details, and rudely closed the outer door in the captain’s
face. But the latter had foreseen this stroke, and placed his boot
between the door and the door-case, so that the lock did not catch, and
the clerk was still nose to nose with his interlocutor. This made him
change his tone, and say, with terrified politeness, “If monsieur wishes
to speak to M. le surintendant, he must go to the ante-chambers; these
are the offices, where monseigneur never comes.”

“Oh! very well! Where are they?” replied D’Artagnan.

“On the other side of the court,” said the clerk, delighted to be free.
D’Artagnan crossed the court, and fell in with a crowd of servants.

“Monseigneur sees nobody at this hour,” he was answered by a fellow
carrying a vermeil dish, in which were three pheasants and twelve
quails.

“Tell him,” said the captain, laying hold of the servant by the end
of his dish, “that I am M. d’Artagnan, captain of his majesty’s
musketeers.”

The fellow uttered a cry of surprise, and disappeared; D’Artagnan
following him slowly. He arrived just in time to meet M. Pelisson in
the ante-chamber: the latter, a little pale, came hastily out of the
dining-room to learn what was the matter. D’Artagnan smiled.

“There is nothing unpleasant, Monsieur Pelisson; only a little order to
receive the money for.”

“Ah!” said Fouquet’s friend, breathing more freely; and he took the
captain by the hand, and, dragging him behind him, led him into the
dining-room, where a number of friends surrounded the surintendant,
placed in the center, and buried in the cushions of a _fauteuil_. There
were assembled all the Epicureans who so lately at Vaux had done the
honors of the mansion of wit and money in aid of M. Fouquet. Joyous
friends, for the most part faithful, they had not fled their protector
at the approach of the storm, and, in spite of the threatening heavens,
in spite of the trembling earth, they remained there, smiling, cheerful,
as devoted in misfortune as they had been in prosperity. On the left
of the surintendant sat Madame de Belliere; on his right was Madame
Fouquet; as if braving the laws of the world, and putting all vulgar
reasons of propriety to silence, the two protecting angels of this
man united to offer, at the moment of the crisis, the support of
their twined arms. Madame de Belliere was pale, trembling, and full of
respectful attentions for madame la surintendante, who, with one hand on
her husband’s, was looking anxiously towards the door by which Pelisson
had gone out to bring D’Artagnan. The captain entered at first full
of courtesy, and afterwards of admiration, when, with his infallible
glance, he had divined as well as taken in the expression of every face.
Fouquet raised himself up in his chair.

“Pardon me, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said he, “if I did not myself receive
you when coming in the king’s name.” And he pronounced the last words
with a sort of melancholy firmness, which filled the hearts of all his
friends with terror.

“Monseigneur,” replied D’Artagnan, “I only come to you in the king’s
name to demand payment of an order for two hundred pistoles.”

The clouds passed from every brow but that of Fouquet, which still
remained overcast.

“Ah! then,” said he, “perhaps you also are setting out for Nantes?”

“I do not know whither I am setting out, monseigneur.”

“But,” said Madame Fouquet, recovered from her fright, “you are not
going so soon, monsieur le capitaine, as not to do us the honor to take
a seat with us?”

“Madame, I should esteem that a great honor done me, but I am so
pressed for time, that, you see, I have been obliged to permit myself to
interrupt your repast to procure payment of my note.”

“The reply to which shall be gold,” said Fouquet, making a sign to his
intendant, who went out with the order D’Artagnan handed him.

“Oh!” said the latter, “I was not uneasy about the payment; the house is
good.”

A painful smile passed over the pale features of Fouquet.

“Are you in pain?” asked Madame de Belliere.

“Do you feel your attack coming on?” asked Madame Fouquet.

“Neither, thank you both,” said Fouquet.

“Your attack?” said D’Artagnan, in his turn; “are you unwell,
monseigneur?”

“I have a tertian fever, which seized me after the _fete_ at Vaux.”

“Caught cold in the grottos, at night, perhaps?”

“No, no; nothing but agitation, that was all.”

“The too much heart you displayed in your reception of the king,”
 said La Fontaine, quietly, without suspicion that he was uttering a
sacrilege.

“We cannot devote too much heart to the reception of our king,” said
Fouquet, mildly, to his poet.

“Monsieur meant to say the too great ardor,” interrupted D’Artagnan,
with perfect frankness and much amenity. “The fact is, monseigneur, that
hospitality was never practiced as at Vaux.”

Madame Fouquet permitted her countenance to show clearly that if Fouquet
had conducted himself well towards the king, the king had hardly done
the like to the minister. But D’Artagnan knew the terrible secret. He
alone with Fouquet knew it; those two men had not, the one the courage
to complain, the other the right to accuse. The captain, to whom the
two hundred pistoles were brought, was about to take his leave, when
Fouquet, rising, took a glass of wine, and ordered one to be given to
D’Artagnan.

“Monsieur,” said he, “to the health of the king, _whatever may happen_.”

“And to your health, monseigneur, _whatever may happen_,” said
D’Artagnan.

He bowed, with these words of evil omen, to all the company, who rose as
soon as they heard the sound of his spurs and boots at the bottom of the
stairs.

“I, for a moment, thought it was I and not my money he wanted,” said
Fouquet, endeavoring to laugh.

“You!” cried his friends; “and what for, in the name of Heaven!”

“Oh! do not deceive yourselves, my dear brothers in Epicurus,” said the
superintendent; “I do not wish to make a comparison between the most
humble sinner on the earth, and the God we adore, but remember, he gave
one day to his friends a repast which is called the Last Supper, and
which was nothing but a farewell dinner, like that which we are making
at this moment.”

A painful cry of denial arose from all parts of the table. “Shut the
doors,” said Fouquet, and the servants disappeared. “My friends,”
 continued Fouquet, lowering his voice, “what was I formerly? What am
I now? Consult among yourselves and reply. A man like me sinks when
he does not continue to rise. What shall we say, then, when he really
sinks? I have no more money, no more credit; I have no longer anything
but powerful enemies, and powerless friends.”

“Quick!” cried Pelisson. “Since you explain yourself with such
frankness, it is our duty to be frank, likewise. Yes, you are
ruined--yes, you are hastening to your ruin--stop. And, in the first
place, what money have we left?”

“Seven hundred thousand livres,” said the intendant.

“Bread,” murmured Madame Fouquet.

“Relays,” said Pelisson, “relays, and fly!”

“Whither?”

“To Switzerland--to Savoy--but fly!”

“If monseigneur flies,” said Madame Belliere, “it will be said that he
was guilty--was afraid.”

“More than that, it will be said that I have carried away twenty
millions with me.”

“We will draw up memoirs to justify you,” said La Fontaine. “Fly!”

“I will remain,” said Fouquet. “And, besides, does not everything serve
me?”

“You have Belle-Isle,” cried the Abbe Fouquet.

“And I am naturally going there, when going to Nantes,” replied the
superintendent. “Patience, then, patience!”

“Before arriving at Nantes, what a distance!” said Madame Fouquet.

“Yes, I know that well,” replied Fouquet. “But what is to be done there?
The king summons me to the States. I know well it is for the purpose of
ruining me; but to refuse to go would be to evince uneasiness.”

“Well, I have discovered the means of reconciling everything,” cried
Pelisson. “You are going to set out for Nantes.”

Fouquet looked at him with an air of surprise.

“But with friends; but in your own carriage as far as Orleans; in your
own barge as far as Nantes; always ready to defend yourself, if you are
attacked; to escape, if you are threatened. In fact, you will carry your
money against all chances; and, whilst flying, you will only have obeyed
the king; then, reaching the sea, when you like, you will embark for
Belle-Isle, and from Belle-Isle you will shoot out wherever it may
please you, like the eagle that leaps into space when it has been driven
from its eyrie.”

A general assent followed Pelisson’s words. “Yes, do so,” said Madame
Fouquet to her husband.

“Do so,” said Madame de Belliere.

“Do it! do it!” cried all his friends.

“I will do so,” replied Fouquet.

“This very evening?”

“In an hour?”

“Instantly.”

“With seven hundred thousand livres you can lay the foundation of
another fortune,” said the Abbe Fouquet.

“What is there to prevent our arming corsairs at Belle-Isle?”

“And, if necessary, we will go and discover a new world,” added La
Fontaine, intoxicated with fresh projects and enthusiasm.

A knock at the door interrupted this concert of joy and hope. “A courier
from the king,” said the master of the ceremonies.

A profound silence immediately ensued, as if the message brought by this
courier was nothing but a reply to all the projects given birth to a
moment before. Every one waited to see what the master would do. His
brow was streaming with perspiration, and he was really suffering from
his fever at that instant. He passed into his cabinet, to receive the
king’s message. There prevailed, as we have said, such a silence in the
chambers, and throughout the attendance, that from the dining-room could
be heard the voice of Fouquet, saying, “That is well, monsieur.” This
voice was, however, broken by fatigue, and trembled with emotion. An
instant after, Fouquet called Gourville, who crossed the gallery amidst
the universal expectation. At length, he himself re-appeared among his
guests; but it was no longer the same pale, spiritless countenance they
had beheld when he left them; from pale he had become livid; and from
spiritless, annihilated. A breathing, living specter, he advanced with
his arms stretched out, his mouth parched, like a shade that comes to
salute the friends of former days. On seeing him thus, every one cried
out, and every one rushed towards Fouquet. The latter, looking at
Pelisson, leaned upon his wife, and pressed the icy hand of the Marquise
de Belliere.

“Well,” said he, in a voice which had nothing human in it.

“What has happened, my God!” said some one to him.

Fouquet opened his right hand, which was clenched, but glistening
with perspiration, and displayed a paper, upon which Pelisson cast a
terrified glance. He read the following lines, written by the king’s
hand:

“‘DEAR AND WELL-BELOVED MONSIEUR FOUQUET,--Give us, upon that which you
have left of ours, the sum of seven hundred thousand livres, of which we
stand in need to prepare for our departure.

“‘And, as we know your health is not good, we pray God to restore you,
and to have you in His holy keeping. “‘LOUIS.

“‘The present letter is to serve as a receipt.’”

A murmur of terror circulated through the apartment.

“Well,” cried Pelisson, in his turn, “you have received that letter?”

“Received it, yes!”

“What will you do, then?”

“Nothing, since I have received it.”

“But--”

“If I have received it, Pelisson, I have paid it,” said the
surintendant, with a simplicity that went to the heart of all present.

“You have paid it!” cried Madame Fouquet. “Then we are ruined!”

“Come, no useless words,” interrupted Pelisson. “Next to money, life.
Monseigneur, to horse! to horse!”

“What, leave us!” at once cried both the women, wild with grief.

“Eh! monseigneur, in saving yourself, you save us all. To horse!”

“But he cannot hold himself on. Look at him.”

“Oh! if he takes time to reflect--” said the intrepid Pelisson.

“He is right,” murmured Fouquet.

“Monseigneur! Monseigneur!” cried Gourville, rushing up the stairs, four
steps at once. “Monseigneur!”

“Well! what?”

“I escorted, as you desired, the king’s courier with the money.”

“Yes.”

“Well! when I arrived at the Palais Royal, I saw--”

“Take breath, my poor friend, take breath; you are suffocating.”

“What did you see?” cried the impatient friends.

“I saw the musketeers mounting on horseback,” said Gourville.

“There, then!” cried every voice at once; “there, then! is there an
instant to be lost?”

Madame Fouquet rushed downstairs, calling for her horses; Madame de
Belliere flew after her, catching her in her arms, and saying: “Madame,
in the name of his safety, do not betray anything, do not manifest
alarm.”

Pelisson ran to have the horses put to the carriages. And, in the
meantime, Gourville gathered in his hat all that the weeping friends
were able to throw into it of gold and silver--the last offering, the
pious alms made to misery by poverty. The surintendant, dragged along by
some, carried by others, was shut up in his carriage. Gourville took the
reins, and mounted the box. Pelisson supported Madame Fouquet, who had
fainted. Madame de Belliere had more strength, and was well paid for
it; she received Fouquet’s last kiss. Pelisson easily explained this
precipitate departure by saying that an order from the king had summoned
the minister to Nantes.



CHAPTER XXXVI.
In M. Colbert’s Carriage.

As Gourville had seen, the king’s musketeers were mounting and following
their captain. The latter, who did not like to be confined in his
proceedings, left his brigade under the orders of a lieutenant, and set
off on post horses, recommending his men to use all diligence. However
rapidly they might travel, they could not arrive before him. He had
time, in passing along the Rue des Petits-Champs, to see something
which afforded him plenty of food for thought and conjecture. He saw M.
Colbert coming out from his house to get into his carriage, which was
stationed before the door. In this carriage D’Artagnan perceived the
hoods of two women, and being rather curious, he wished to know the
names of the ladies hid beneath these hoods. To get a glimpse at them,
for they kept themselves closely covered up, he urged his horse so near
the carriage, that he drove him against the step with such force as to
shake everything containing and contained. The terrified women uttered,
the one a faint cry, by which D’Artagnan recognized a young woman, the
other an imprecation, in which he recognized the vigor and _aplomb_ that
half a century bestows. The hoods were thrown back: one of the women
was Madame Vanel, the other the Duchesse de Chevreuse. D’Artagnan’s
eyes were quicker than those of the ladies; he had seen and known them,
whilst they did not recognize him; and as they laughed at their fright,
pressing each other’s hands,--

“Humph!” said D’Artagnan, “the old duchesse is no more inaccessible to
friendship than formerly. _She_ paying her court to the mistress of M.
Colbert! Poor M. Fouquet! that presages you nothing good!”

He rode on. M. Colbert got into his carriage and the distinguished trio
commenced a sufficiently slow pilgrimage toward the wood of Vincennes.
Madame de Chevreuse set down Madame Vanel at her husband’s house, and,
left alone with M. Colbert, chatted upon affairs whilst continuing her
ride. She had an inexhaustible fund of conversation, that dear duchesse,
and as she always talked for the ill of others, though ever with a view
to her own good, her conversation amused her interlocutor, and did not
fail to leave a favorable impression.

She taught Colbert, who, poor man! was ignorant of the fact, how great
a minister he was, and how Fouquet would soon become a cipher. She
promised to rally around him, when he should become surintendant,
all the old nobility of the kingdom, and questioned him as to the
preponderance it would be proper to allow La Valliere. She praised him,
she blamed him, she bewildered him. She showed him the secret of so many
secrets that, for a moment, Colbert thought he was doing business with
the devil. She proved to him that she held in her hand the Colbert of
to-day, as she had held the Fouquet of yesterday; and as he asked her
very simply the reason of her hatred for the surintendant: “Why do you
yourself hate him?” said she.

“Madame, in politics,” replied he, “the differences of system oft bring
about dissentions between men. M. Fouquet always appeared to me to
practice a system opposed to the true interests of the king.”

She interrupted him.--“I will say no more to you about M. Fouquet. The
journey the king is about to take to Nantes will give a good account of
him. M. Fouquet, for me, is a man gone by--and for you also.”

Colbert made no reply. “On his return from Nantes,” continued the
duchesse, “the king, who is only anxious for a pretext, will find
that the States have not behaved well--that they have made too few
sacrifices. The States will say that the imposts are too heavy, and that
the surintendant has ruined them. The king will lay all the blame on M.
Fouquet, and then--”

“And then?” said Colbert.

“Oh! he will be disgraced. Is not that your opinion?”

Colbert darted a glance at the duchesse, which plainly said: “If M.
Fouquet be only disgraced, you will not be the cause of it.”

“Your place, M. Colbert,” the duchesse hastened to say, “must be a high
place. Do you perceive any one between the king and yourself, after the
fall of M. Fouquet?”

“I do not understand,” said he.

“You _will_ understand. To what does your ambition aspire?”

“I have none.”

“It was useless, then, to overthrow the superintendent, Monsieur
Colbert. It was idle.”

“I had the honor to tell you, madame--”

“Oh! yes, I know, all about the interest of the king--but, if you
please, we will speak of your own.”

“Mine! that is to say, the affairs of his majesty.”

“In short, are you, or are you not endeavoring to ruin M. Fouquet?
Answer without evasion.”

“Madame, I ruin nobody.”

“I am endeavoring to comprehend, then, why you purchased from me the
letters of M. Mazarin concerning M. Fouquet. Neither can I conceive why
you have laid those letters before the king.”

Colbert, half stupefied, looked at the duchesse with an air of
constraint.

“Madame,” said he, “I can less easily conceive how you, who received the
money, can reproach me on that head--”

“That is,” said the old duchesse, “because we must will that which we
wish for, unless we are not able to obtain what we wish.”

“_Will!_” said Colbert, quite confounded by such coarse logic.

“You are not able, _hein!_ Speak.”

“I am not able, I allow, to destroy certain influences near the king.”

“That fight in favor of M. Fouquet? What are they? Stop, let me help
you.”

“Do, madame.”

“La Valliere?”

“Oh! very little influence; no knowledge of business, and small means.
M. Fouquet has paid his court to her.”

“To defend him would be to accuse herself, would it not?”

“I think it would.”

“There is still another influence, what do you say to that?”

“Is it considerable?”

“The queen-mother, perhaps?”

“Her majesty, the queen-mother, has a weakness for M. Fouquet very
prejudicial to her son.”

“Never believe that,” said the old duchesse, smiling.

“Oh!” said Colbert, with incredulity, “I have often experienced it.”

“Formerly?”

“Very recently, madame, at Vaux. It was she who prevented the king from
having M. Fouquet arrested.”

“People do not forever entertain the same opinions, my dear monsieur.
That which the queen may have wished recently, she would not wish,
perhaps, to-day.”

“And why not?” said Colbert, astonished.

“Oh! the reason is of very little consequence.”

“On the contrary, I think it is of great consequence; for, if I were
certain of not displeasing her majesty, the queen-mother, my scruples
would be all removed.”

“Well! have you never heard talk of a certain secret?”

“A secret?”

“Call it what you like. In short, the queen-mother has conceived a
bitter hatred for all those who have participated, in one fashion or
another, in the discovery of this secret, and M. Fouquet I believe is
one of these.”

“Then,” said Colbert, “we may be sure of the assent of the
queen-mother?”

“I have just left her majesty, and she assures me so.”

“So be it, then, madame.”

“But there is something further; do you happen to know a man who was the
intimate friend of M. Fouquet, M. d’Herblay, a bishop, I believe?”

“Bishop of Vannes.”

“Well! this M. d’Herblay, who also knew the secret, the queen-mother is
pursuing with the utmost rancor.”

“Indeed!”

“So hotly pursued, that if he were dead, she would not be satisfied with
anything less than his head, to satisfy her he would never speak again.”

“And is that the desire of the queen-mother?”

“An order is given for it.”

“This Monsieur d’Herblay shall be sought for, madame.”

“Oh! it is well known where he is.”

Colbert looked at the duchesse.

“Say where, madame.”

“He is at Belle-Ile-en-Mer.”

“At the residence of M. Fouquet?”

“At the residence of M. Fouquet.”

“He shall be taken.”

It was now the duchesse’s turn to smile. “Do not fancy the capture so
easy,” said she; “do not promise it so lightly.”

“Why not, madame?”

“Because M. d’Herblay is not one of those people who can be taken when
and where you please.”

“He is a rebel, then?”

“Oh! Monsieur Colbert, we have passed all our lives in making rebels,
and yet you see plainly, that so far from being taken, we take others.”

Colbert fixed upon the old duchesse one of those fierce looks of which
no words can convey the expression, accompanied by a firmness not
altogether wanting in grandeur. “The times are gone,” said he, “in which
subjects gained duchies by making war against the king of France. If M.
d’Herblay conspires, he will perish on the scaffold. That will give, or
will not give, pleasure to his enemies,--a matter, by the way, of little
importance to _us_.”

And this _us_, a strange word in the mouth of Colbert, made the duchesse
thoughtful for a moment. She caught herself reckoning inwardly with this
man--Colbert had regained his superiority in the conversation, and he
meant to keep it.

“You ask me, madame,” he said, “to have this M. d’Herblay arrested?”

“I?--I ask you nothing of the kind!”

“I thought you did, madame. But as I have been mistaken, we will leave
him alone; the king has said nothing about him.”

The duchesse bit her nails.

“Besides,” continued Colbert, “what a poor capture would this bishop be!
A bishop game for a king! Oh! no, no; I will not even take the slightest
notice of him.”

The hatred of the duchesse now discovered itself.

“Game for a woman!” said she. “Is not the queen a woman? If she wishes
M. d’Herblay arrested, she has her reasons. Besides, is not M. d’Herblay
the friend of him who is doomed to fall?”

“Oh! never mind that,” said Colbert. “This man shall be spared, if he is
not the enemy of the king. Is that displeasing to you?”

“I say nothing.”

“Yes--you wish to see him in prison, in the Bastile, for instance.”

“I believe a secret better concealed behind the walls of the Bastile
than behind those of Belle-Isle.”

“I will speak to the king about it; he will clear up the point.”

“And whilst waiting for that enlightenment, Monsieur l’Eveque de Vannes
will have escaped. I would do so.”

“Escaped! he! and whither should he escape? Europe is ours, in will, if
not in fact.”

“He will always find an asylum, monsieur. It is evident you know nothing
of the man you have to do with. You do not know D’Herblay; you do not
know Aramis. He was one of those four musketeers who, under the late
king, made Cardinal de Richelieu tremble, and who, during the regency,
gave so much trouble to Monseigneur Mazarin.”

“But, madame, what can he do, unless he has a kingdom to back him?”

“He has one, monsieur.”

“A kingdom, he! what, Monsieur d’Herblay?”

“I repeat to you, monsieur, that if he wants a kingdom, he either has it
or will have it.”

“Well, as you are so earnest that this rebel should not escape, madame,
I promise you he shall not escape.”

“Belle-Isle is fortified, M. Colbert, and fortified by him.”

“If Belle-Isle were also defended by him, Belle-Isle is not impregnable;
and if Monsieur l’Eveque de Vannes is shut up in Belle-Isle, well,
madame, the place shall be besieged, and he will be taken.”

“You may be very certain, monsieur, that the zeal you display in the
interest of the queen-mother will please her majesty mightily, and
you will be magnificently rewarded; but what shall I tell her of your
projects respecting this man?”

“That when once taken, he shall be shut up in a fortress from which her
secret shall never escape.”

“Very well, Monsieur Colbert, and we may say, that, dating from this
instant, we have formed a solid alliance, that is, you and I, and that I
am absolutely at your service.”

“It is I, madame, who place myself at yours. This Chevalier d’Herblay is
a kind of Spanish spy, is he not?”

“Much more.”

“A secret ambassador?”

“Higher still.”

“Stop--King Phillip III. of Spain is a bigot. He is, perhaps, the
confessor of Phillip III.”

“You must go higher even than that.”

“_Mordieu!_” cried Colbert, who forgot himself so far as to swear in the
presence of this great lady, of this old friend of the queen-mother. “He
must then be the general of the Jesuits.”

“I believe you have guessed it at last,” replied the duchesse.

“Ah! then, madame, this man will ruin us all if we do not ruin him; and
we must make haste, too.”

“Such was my opinion, monsieur, but I did not dare to give it you.”

“And it was lucky for us he has attacked the throne, and not us.”

“But, mark this well, M. Colbert. M. d’Herblay is never discouraged; if
he has missed one blow, he will be sure to make another; he will begin
again. If he has allowed an opportunity to escape of making a king for
himself, sooner or later, he will make another, of whom, to a certainty,
you will not be prime minister.”

Colbert knitted his brow with a menacing expression. “I feel assured
that a prison will settle this affair for us, madame, in a manner
satisfactory for both.”

The duchesse smiled again.

“Oh! if you knew,” said she, “how many times Aramis has got out of
prison!”

“Oh!” replied Colbert, “we will take care that he shall not get out
_this_ time.”

“But you were not attending to what I said to you just now. Do you
remember that Aramis was one of the four invincibles whom Richelieu so
dreaded? And at that period the four musketeers were not in possession
of that which they have now--money and experience.”

Colbert bit his lips.

“We will renounce the idea of the prison,” said he, in a lower tone:
“we will find a little retreat from which the invincible cannot possibly
escape.”

“That was well spoken, our ally!” replied the duchesse. “But it is
getting late; had we not better return?”

“The more willingly, madame, from my having my preparations to make for
setting out with the king.”

“To Paris!” cried the duchesse to the coachman.

And the carriage returned towards the Faubourg Saint Antoine, after the
conclusion of the treaty that gave to death the last friend of Fouquet,
the last defender of Belle-Isle, the former friend of Marie Michon, the
new foe of the old duchesse.



CHAPTER XXXVII.
The Two Lighters.

D’Artagnan had set off; Fouquet likewise was gone, and with a rapidity
which doubled the tender interest of his friends. The first moments of
this journey, or better say, this flight, were troubled by a ceaseless
dread of every horse and carriage to be seen behind the fugitive. It was
not natural, in fact, if Louis XIV. was determined to seize this prey,
that he should allow it to escape; the young lion was already accustomed
to the chase, and he had bloodhounds sufficiently clever to be trusted.
But insensibly all fears were dispersed; the surintendant, by hard
traveling, placed such a distance between himself and his persecutors,
that no one of them could reasonably be expected to overtake him. As
to his position, his friends had made it excellent for him. Was he not
traveling to join the king at Nantes, and what did the rapidity prove
but his zeal to obey? He arrived, fatigued, but reassured, at Orleans,
where he found, thanks to the care of a courier who had preceded him,
a handsome lighter of eight oars. These lighters, in the shape of
gondolas, somewhat wide and heavy, containing a small chamber, covered
by the deck, and a chamber in the poop, formed by a tent, then acted as
passage-boats from Orleans to Nantes, by the Loire, and this passage,
a long one in our days, appeared then more easy and convenient than the
high-road, with its post-hacks and its ill-hung carriages. Fouquet went
on board this lighter, which set out immediately. The rowers, knowing
they had the honor of conveying the surintendant of the finances, pulled
with all their strength, and that magic word, the _finances_, promised
them a liberal gratification, of which they wished to prove themselves
worthy. The lighter seemed to leap the mimic waves of the Loire.
Magnificent weather, a sunrise that empurpled all the landscape,
displayed the river in all its limpid serenity. The current and the
rowers carried Fouquet along as wings carry a bird, and he arrived
before Beaugency without the slightest accident having signalized the
voyage. Fouquet hoped to be the first to arrive at Nantes; there he
would see the notables and gain support among the principal members of
the States; he would make himself a necessity, a thing very easy for a
man of his merit, and would delay the catastrophe, if he did not succeed
in avoiding it entirely. “Besides,” said Gourville to him, “at Nantes,
you will make out, or we will make out, the intentions of your enemies;
we will have horses always ready to convey you to Poitou, a bark in
which to gain the sea, and when once upon the open sea, Belle-Isle is
your inviolable port. You see, besides, that no one is watching you, no
one is following.” He had scarcely finished when they discovered at
a distance, behind an elbow formed by the river, the masts of a huge
lighter coming down. The rowers of Fouquet’s boat uttered a cry of
surprise on seeing this galley.

“What is the matter?” asked Fouquet.

“The matter is, monseigneur,” replied the patron of the bark, “that it
is a truly remarkable thing--that lighter comes along like a hurricane.”

Gourville started, and mounted to the deck, in order to obtain a better
view.

Fouquet did not go up with him, but said to Gourville, with restrained
mistrust: “See what it is, dear friend.”

The lighter had just passed the elbow. It came on so fast, that behind
it might be plainly seen the white wake illumined with the fires of the
day.

“How they go,” repeated the skipper, “how they go! They must be well
paid! I did not think,” he added, “that oars of wood could behave better
than ours, but yonder oarsmen prove the contrary.”

“Well they may,” said one of the rowers, “they are twelve, and we but
eight.”

“Twelve rowers!” replied Gourville, “twelve! impossible.”

The number of eight rowers for a lighter had never been exceeded, even
for the king. This honor had been paid to monsieur le surintendant, more
for the sake of haste than of respect.

“What does it mean?” said Gourville, endeavoring to distinguish beneath
the tent, which was already apparent, travelers which the most piercing
eye could not yet have succeeded in discovering.

“They must be in a hurry, for it is not the king,” said the patron.

Fouquet shuddered.

“By what sign do you know that it is not the king?” said Gourville.

“In the first place, because there is no white flag with fleurs-de-lis,
which the royal lighter always carries.”

“And then,” said Fouquet, “because it is impossible it should be the
king, Gourville, as the king was still in Paris yesterday.”

Gourville replied to the surintendant by a look which said: “You were
there yourself yesterday.”

“And by what sign do you make out they are in such haste?” added he, for
the sake of gaining time.

“By this, monsieur,” said the patron; “these people must have set out a
long while after us, and they have already nearly overtaken us.”

“Bah!” said Gourville, “who told you that they do not come from
Beaugency or from Moit even?”

“We have seen no lighter of that shape, except at Orleans. It comes from
Orleans, monsieur, and makes great haste.”

Fouquet and Gourville exchanged a glance. The captain remarked their
uneasiness, and, to mislead him, Gourville immediately said:

“Some friend, who has laid a wager he would catch us; let us win the
wager, and not allow him to come up with us.”

The patron opened his mouth to say that it was quite impossible, but
Fouquet said with much _hauteur_,--“If it is any one who wishes to
overtake us, let him come.”

“We can try, monseigneur,” said the man, timidly. “Come, you fellows,
put out your strength; row, row!”

“No,” said Fouquet, “on the contrary; stop short.”

“Monseigneur! what folly!” interrupted Gourville, stooping towards his
ear.

“Pull up!” repeated Fouquet. The eight oars stopped, and resisting the
water, created a retrograde motion. It stopped. The twelve rowers in the
other did not, at first, perceive this maneuver, for they continued
to urge on their boat so vigorously that it arrived quickly within
musket-shot. Fouquet was short-sighted, Gourville was annoyed by the
sun, now full in his eyes; the skipper alone, with that habit and
clearness which are acquired by a constant struggle with the elements,
perceived distinctly the travelers in the neighboring lighter.

“I can see them!” cried he; “there are two.”

“I can see nothing,” said Gourville.

“You will not be long before you distinguish them; in twenty strokes of
their oars they will be within ten paces of us.”

But what the patron announced was not realized; the lighter imitated
the movement commanded by Fouquet, and instead of coming to join its
pretended friends, it stopped short in the middle of the river.

“I cannot comprehend this,” said the captain.

“Nor I,” cried Gourville.

“You who can see so plainly the people in that lighter,” resumed
Fouquet, “try to describe them to us, before we are too far off.”

“I thought I saw two,” replied the boatman. “I can only see one now,
under the tent.”

“What sort of man is he?”

“He is a dark man, broad-shouldered, bull-necked.”

A little cloud at that moment passed across the azure, darkening the
sun. Gourville, who was still looking, with one hand over his eyes,
became able to see what he sought, and all at once, jumping from the
deck into the chamber where Fouquet awaited him: “Colbert!” said he, in
a voice broken by emotion.

“Colbert!” repeated Fouquet. “Too strange! but no, it is impossible!”

“I tell you I recognized him, and he, at the same time, so plainly
recognized me, that he is just gone into the chamber on the poop.
Perhaps the king has sent him on our track.”

“In that case he would join us, instead of lying by. What is he doing
there?”

“He is watching us, without a doubt.”

“I do not like uncertainty,” said Fouquet; “let us go straight up to
him.”

“Oh! monseigneur, do not do that, the lighter is full of armed men.”

“He wishes to arrest me, then, Gourville? Why does he not come on?”

“Monseigneur, it is not consistent with your dignity to go to meet even
your ruin.”

“But to allow them to watch me like a malefactor!”

“Nothing yet proves that they are watching you, monseigneur; be
patient!”

“What is to be done, then?”

“Do not stop; you were only going so fast to appear to obey the king’s
order with zeal. Redouble the speed. He who lives will see!”

“That is better. Come!” cried Fouquet; “since they remain stock-still
yonder, let us go on.”

The captain gave the signal, and Fouquet’s rowers resumed their task
with all the success that could be looked for from men who had rested.
Scarcely had the lighter made a hundred fathoms, than the other, that
with the twelve rowers, resumed its rapid course. This position lasted
all day, without any increase or diminution of distance between the two
vessels. Towards evening Fouquet wished to try the intentions of his
persecutor. He ordered his rowers to pull towards the shore, as if to
effect a landing. Colbert’s lighter imitated this maneuver, and steered
towards the shore in a slanting direction. By the merest chance, at
the spot where Fouquet pretended to wish to land, a stableman, from
the chateau of Langeais, was following the flowery banks leading three
horses in halters. Without doubt the people of the twelve-oared lighter
fancied that Fouquet was directing his course to these horses ready
for flight, for four or five men, armed with muskets, jumped from the
lighter on to the shore, and marched along the banks, as if to gain
ground on the horseman. Fouquet, satisfied of having forced the enemy to
a demonstration, considered his intention evident, and put his boat
in motion again. Colbert’s people returned likewise to theirs, and the
course of the two vessels was resumed with fresh perseverance. Upon
seeing this, Fouquet felt himself threatened closely, and in a prophetic
voice--“Well, Gourville,” said he, whisperingly, “what did I say at our
last repast, at my house? Am I going, or not, to my ruin?”

“Oh! monseigneur!”

“These two boats, which follow each other with so much emulation, as if
we were disputing, M. Colbert and I, a prize for swiftness on the
Loire, do they not aptly represent our fortunes; and do you not believe,
Gourville, that one of the two will be wrecked at Nantes?”

“At least,” objected Gourville, “there is still uncertainty; you are
about to appear at the States; you are about to show what sort of man
you are; your eloquence and genius for business are the buckler and
sword that will serve to defend you, if not to conquer with. The Bretons
do not know you; and when they become acquainted with you your cause
is won! Oh! let M. Colbert look to it well, for his lighter is as much
exposed as yours to being upset. Both go quickly, his faster than yours,
it is true; we shall see which will be wrecked first.”

Fouquet, taking Gourville’s hand--“My friend,” said he, “everything
considered, remember the proverb, ‘First come, first served!’ Well! M.
Colbert takes care not to pass me. He is a prudent man is M. Colbert.”

He was right; the two lighters held their course as far as Nantes,
watching each other. When the surintendant landed, Gourville hoped he
should be able to seek refuge at once, and have the relays prepared.
But, at the landing, the second lighter joined the first, and Colbert,
approaching Fouquet, saluted him on the quay with marks of the
profoundest respect--marks so significant, so public, that their result
was the bringing of the whole population upon La Fosse. Fouquet was
completely self-possessed; he felt that in his last moments of greatness
he had obligations towards himself. He wished to fall from such a height
that his fall should crush some of his enemies. Colbert was there--so
much the worse for Colbert. The surintendant, therefore, coming up to
him, replied, with that arrogant semi-closure of the eyes peculiar to
him--“What! is that you, M. Colbert?”

“To offer you my respects, monseigneur,” said the latter.

“Were you in that lighter?”--pointing to the one with twelve rowers.

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“Of twelve rowers?” said Fouquet; “what luxury, M. Colbert. For a moment
I thought it was the queen-mother.”

“Monseigneur!”--and Colbert blushed.

“This is a voyage that will cost those who have to pay for it
dear, Monsieur l’Intendant!” said Fouquet. “But you have, happily,
arrived!--You see, however,” added he, a moment after, “that I, who had
but eight rowers, arrived before you.” And he turned his back towards
him, leaving him uncertain whether the maneuvers of the second lighter
had escaped the notice of the first. At least he did not give him
the satisfaction of showing that he had been frightened. Colbert, so
annoyingly attacked, did not give way.

“I have not been quick, monseigneur,” he replied, “because I followed
your example whenever you stopped.”

“And why did you do that, Monsieur Colbert?” cried Fouquet, irritated by
the base audacity; “as you had a superior crew to mine, why did you not
either join me or pass me?”

“Out of respect,” said the intendant, bowing to the ground.

Fouquet got into a carriage which the city had sent to him, we know not
why or how, and he repaired to _la Maison de Nantes_, escorted by a vast
crowd of people, who for several days had been agog with expectation of
a convocation of the States. Scarcely was he installed when Gourville
went out to order horses on the route to Poitiers and Vannes, and a boat
at Paimboef. He performed these various operations with so much mystery,
activity, and generosity, that never was Fouquet, then laboring under an
attack of fever, more nearly saved, except for the counteraction of that
immense disturber of human projects,--chance. A report was spread during
the night, that the king was coming in great haste on post horses, and
would arrive in ten or twelve hours at the latest. The people, while
waiting for the king, were greatly rejoiced to see the musketeers, newly
arrived, with Monsieur d’Artagnan, their captain, and quartered in the
castle, of which they occupied all the posts, in quality of guard of
honor. M. d’Artagnan, who was very polite, presented himself, about
ten o’clock, at the lodgings of the surintendant to pay his respectful
compliments; and although the minister suffered from fever, although
he was in such pain as to be bathed in sweat, he would receive M.
d’Artagnan, who was delighted with that honor, as will be seen by the
conversation they had together.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.
Friendly Advice.

Fouquet had gone to bed, like a man who clings to life, and wishes to
economize, as much as possible, that slender tissue of existence, of
which the shocks and frictions of this world so quickly wear out the
tenuity. D’Artagnan appeared at the door of this chamber, and was
saluted by the superintendent with a very affable “Good day.”

“_Bon jour!_ monseigneur,” replied the musketeer; “how did you get
through the journey?”

“Tolerably well, thank you.”

“And the fever?”

“But poorly. I drink, as you perceive. I am scarcely arrived, and I have
already levied a contribution of _tisane_ upon Nantes.”

“You should sleep first, monseigneur.”

“Eh! _corbleu!_ my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan, I should be very glad to
sleep.”

“Who hinders you?”

“Why, _you_ in the first place.”

“I? Oh, monseigneur!”

“No doubt you do. Is it at Nantes as at Paris? Do you not come in the
king’s name?”

“For Heaven’s sake, monseigneur,” replied the captain, “leave the king
alone! The day on which I shall come on the part of the king, for the
purpose you mean, take my word for it, I will not leave you long in
doubt. You will see me place my hand on my sword, according to the
_ordonnance_, and you will hear my say at once, in ceremonial voice,
‘Monseigneur, in the name of the king, I arrest you!’”

“You promise me that frankness?” said the superintendent.

“Upon my honor! But we have not come to that, believe me.”

“What makes you think that, M. d’Artagnan? For my part, I think quite
the contrary.”

“I have heard speak of nothing of the kind,” replied D’Artagnan.

“Eh! eh!” said Fouquet.

“Indeed, no. You are an agreeable man, in spite of your fever. The king
should not, cannot help loving you, at the bottom of his heart.”

Fouquet’s expression implied doubt. “But M. Colbert?” said he; “does M.
Colbert love me as much as you say?”

“I am not speaking of M. Colbert,” replied D’Artagnan. “He is an
exceptional man. He does not love you; so much is very possible; but,
_mordioux!_ the squirrel can guard himself against the adder with very
little trouble.”

“Do you know that you are speaking to me quite as a friend?” replied
Fouquet; “and that, upon my life! I have never met with a man of your
intelligence, and heart?”

“You are pleased to say so,” replied D’Artagnan. “Why did you wait till
to-day to pay me such a compliment?”

“Blind that we are!” murmured Fouquet.

“Your voice is getting hoarse,” said D’Artagnan; “drink, monseigneur,
drink!” And he offered him a cup of _tisane_, with the most friendly
cordiality; Fouquet took it, and thanked him by a gentle smile. “Such
things only happen to me,” said the musketeer. “I have passed ten years
under your very beard, while you were rolling about tons of gold. You
were clearing an annual pension of four millions; you never observed me;
and you find out there is such a person in the world, just at the moment
you--”

“Just at the moment I am about to fall,” interrupted Fouquet. “That is
true, my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“I did not say so.”

“But you thought so; and that is the same thing. Well! if I fall,
take my word as truth, I shall not pass a single day without saying
to myself, as I strike my brow, ‘Fool! fool!--stupid mortal! You had a
Monsieur d’Artagnan under your eye and hand, and you did not employ him,
you did not enrich him!’”

“You overwhelm me,” said the captain. “I esteem you greatly.”

“There exists another man, then, who does not think as M. Colbert
thinks,” said the surintendant.

“How this M. Colbert looms up in your imagination! He is worse than
fever!”

“Oh! I have good cause,” said Fouquet. “Judge for yourself.” And he
related the details of the course of the lighters, and the hypocritical
persecution of Colbert. “Is not this a clear sign of my ruin?”

D’Artagnan became very serious. “That is true,” he said. “Yes; it has
an unsavory odor, as M. de Treville used to say.” And he fixed on M.
Fouquet his intelligent and significant look.

“Am I not clearly designated in that, captain? Is not the king bringing
me to Nantes to get me away from Paris, where I have so many creatures,
and to possess himself of Belle-Isle?”

“Where M. d’Herblay is,” added D’Artagnan. Fouquet raised his head. “As
for me, monseigneur,” continued D’Artagnan, “I can assure you the king
has said nothing to me against you.”

“Indeed!”

“The king commanded me to set out for Nantes, it is true; and to say
nothing about it to M. de Gesvres.”

“My friend.”

“To M. de Gesvres, yes, monseigneur,” continued the musketeer, whose eye
s did not cease to speak a language different from the language of his
lips. “The king, moreover, commanded me to take a brigade of musketeers,
which is apparently superfluous, as the country is quite quiet.”

“A brigade!” said Fouquet, raising himself upon his elbow.

“Ninety-six horsemen, yes, monseigneur. The same number as were employed
in arresting MM. de Chalais, de Cinq-Mars, and Montmorency.”

Fouquet pricked up his ears at these words, pronounced without apparent
value. “And what else?” said he.

“Oh! nothing but insignificant orders; such as guarding the castle,
guarding every lodging, allowing none of M. de Gesvres’s guards to
occupy a single post.”

“And as to myself,” cried Fouquet, “what orders had you?”

“As to you, monseigneur?--not the smallest word.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan, my safety, my honor, perhaps my life are at stake.
You would not deceive me?”

“I?--to what end? Are you threatened? Only there really is an order with
respect to carriages and boats--”

“An order?”

“Yes; but it cannot concern you--a simple measure of police.”

“What is it, captain?--what is it?”

“To forbid all horses or boats to leave Nantes, without a pass, signed
by the king.”

“Great God! but--”

D’Artagnan began to laugh. “All that is not to be put into execution
before the arrival of the king at Nantes. So that you see plainly,
monseigneur, the order in nowise concerns you.”

Fouquet became thoughtful, and D’Artagnan feigned not to observe his
preoccupation. “It is evident, by my thus confiding to you the orders
which have been given to me, that I am friendly towards you, and that I
am trying to prove to you that none of them are directed against you.”

“Without doubt!--without doubt!” said Fouquet, still absent.

“Let us recapitulate,” said the captain, his glance beaming with
earnestness. “A special guard about the castle, in which your lodging is
to be, is it not?”

“Do you know the castle?”

“Ah! monseigneur, a regular prison! The absence of M. de Gesvres, who
has the honor of being one of your friends. The closing of the gates of
the city, and of the river without a pass; but, only when the king shall
have arrived. Please to observe, Monsieur Fouquet, that if, instead of
speaking to man like you, who are one of the first in the kingdom, I
were speaking to a troubled, uneasy conscience--I should compromise
myself forever. What a fine opportunity for any one who wished to be
free! No police, no guards, no orders; the water free, the roads free,
Monsieur d’Artagnan obliged to lend his horses, if required. All this
ought to reassure you, Monsieur Fouquet, for the king would not have
left me thus independent, if he had any sinister designs. In truth,
Monsieur Fouquet, ask me whatever you like, I am at your service; and,
in return, if you will consent to do it, do me a service, that of giving
my compliments to Aramis and Porthos, in case you embark for Belle-Isle,
as you have a right to do without changing your dress, immediately, in
your _robe de chambre_--just as you are.” Saying these words, and with
a profound bow, the musketeer, whose looks had lost none of their
intelligent kindness, left the apartment. He had not reached the steps
of the vestibule, when Fouquet, quite beside himself, hung to the
bell-rope, and shouted, “My horses!--my lighter!” But nobody answered.
The surintendant dressed himself with everything that came to hand.

“Gourville!--Gourville!” cried he, while slipping his watch into
his pocket. And the bell sounded again, whilst Fouquet repeated,
“Gourville!--Gourville!”

Gourville at length appeared, breathless and pale.

“Let us be gone! Let us be gone!” cried Fouquet, as soon as he saw him.

“It is too late!” said the surintendant’s poor friend.

“Too late!--why?”

“Listen!” And they heard the sounds of trumpets and drums in front of
the castle.

“What does that mean, Gourville?”

“It means the king is come, monseigneur.”

“The king!”

“The king, who has ridden double stages, who has killed horses, and who
is eight hours in advance of all our calculations.”

“We are lost!” murmured Fouquet. “Brave D’Artagnan, all is over, thou
has spoken to me too late!”

The king, in fact, was entering the city, which soon resounded with the
cannon from the ramparts, and from a vessel which replied from the lower
parts of the river. Fouquet’s brow darkened; he called his _valets de
chambre_ and dressed in ceremonial costume. From his window, behind the
curtains, he could see the eagerness of the people, and the movement of
a large troop, which had followed the prince. The king was conducted
to the castle with great pomp, and Fouquet saw him dismount under the
portcullis, and say something in the ear of D’Artagnan, who held his
stirrup. D’Artagnan, when the king had passed under the arch, directed
his steps towards the house Fouquet was in; but so slowly, and stopping
so frequently to speak to his musketeers, drawn up like a hedge, that
it might be said he was counting the seconds, or the steps, before
accomplishing his object. Fouquet opened the window to speak to him in
the court.

“Ah!” cried D’Artagnan, on perceiving him, “are you still there,
monseigneur?”

And that word _still_ completed the proof to Fouquet of how much
information and how many useful counsels were contained in the first
visit the musketeer had paid him. The surintendant sighed deeply.
“Good heavens! yes, monsieur,” replied he. “The arrival of the king has
interrupted me in the projects I had formed.”

“Oh, then you know that the king has arrived?”

“Yes, monsieur, I have seen him; and this time you come from him--”

“To inquire after you, monseigneur; and, if your health is not too bad,
to beg you to have the kindness to repair to the castle.”

“Directly, Monsieur d’Artagnan, directly!”

“Ah, _mordioux!_” said the captain, “now the king is come, there is no
more walking for anybody--no more free will; the password governs all
now, you as much as me, me as much as you.”

Fouquet heaved a last sigh, climbed with difficulty into his carriage,
so great was his weakness, and went to the castle, escorted by
D’Artagnan, whose politeness was not less terrifying this time than it
had just before been consoling and cheerful.



CHAPTER XXXIX.
How the King, Louis XIV., Played His Little Part.

As Fouquet was alighting from his carriage, to enter the castle of
Nantes, a man of mean appearance went up to him with marks of the
greatest respect, and gave him a letter. D’Artagnan endeavored to
prevent this man from speaking to Fouquet, and pushed him away, but the
message had been given to the surintendant. Fouquet opened the letter
and read it, and instantly a vague terror, which D’Artagnan did not
fail to penetrate, was painted on the countenance of the first minister.
Fouquet put the paper into the portfolio which he had under his arm, and
passed on towards the king’s apartments. D’Artagnan, through the small
windows made at every landing of the donjon stairs, saw, as he went up
behind Fouquet, the man who had delivered the note, looking round him
on the place and making signs to several persons, who disappeared in the
adjacent streets, after having themselves repeated the signals. Fouquet
was made to wait for a moment on the terrace of which we have spoken,--a
terrace which abutted on the little corridor, at the end of which the
cabinet of the king was located. Here D’Artagnan passed on before the
surintendant, whom, till that time, he had respectfully accompanied, and
entered the royal cabinet.

“Well?” asked Louis XIV., who, on perceiving him, threw on to the table
covered with papers a large green cloth.

“The order is executed, sire.”

“And Fouquet?”

“Monsieur le surintendant follows me,” said D’Artagnan.

“In ten minutes let him be introduced,” said the king, dismissing
D’Artagnan again with a gesture. The latter retired; but had scarcely
reached the corridor at the extremity of which Fouquet was waiting for
him, when he was recalled by the king’s bell.

“Did he not appear astonished?” asked the king.

“Who, sire?”

“_Fouquet_,” replied the king, without saying monsieur, a peculiarity
which confirmed the captain of the musketeers in his suspicions.

“No, sire,” replied he.

“That’s well!” And a second time Louis dismissed D’Artagnan.

Fouquet had not quitted the terrace where he had been left by his guide.
He reperused his note, conceived thus:

“Something is being contrived against you. Perhaps they will not dare to
carry it out at the castle; it will be on your return home. The house
is already surrounded by musketeers. Do not enter. A white horse is in
waiting for you behind the esplanade!”

Fouquet recognized the writing and zeal of Gourville. Not being willing
that, if any evil happened to himself, this paper should compromise a
faithful friend, the surintendant was busy tearing it into a thousand
morsels, spread about by the wind from the balustrade of the terrace.
D’Artagnan found him watching the snowflake fluttering of the last
scraps in space.

“Monsieur,” said he, “the king awaits you.”

Fouquet walked with a deliberate step along the little corridor, where
MM. de Brienne and Rose were at work, whilst the Duc de Saint-Aignan,
seated on a chair, likewise in the corridor, appeared to be waiting
for orders, with feverish impatience, his sword between his legs. It
appeared strange to Fouquet that MM. Brienne, Rose, and de Saint-Aignan,
in general so attentive and obsequious, should scarcely take the least
notice, as he, the surintendant, passed. But how could he expect to find
it otherwise among courtiers, he whom the king no longer called anything
but _Fouquet?_ He raised his head, determined to look every one and
everything bravely in the face, and entered the king’s apartment, where
a little bell, which we already know, had already announced him to his
majesty.

The king, without rising, nodded to him, and with interest: “Well! how
are you, Monsieur Fouquet?” said he.

“I am in a high fever,” replied the surintendant; “but I am at the
king’s service.”

“That is well; the States assemble to-morrow; have you a speech ready?”

Fouquet looked at the king with astonishment. “I have not, sire,”
 replied he; “but I will improvise one. I am too well acquainted with
affairs to feel any embarrassment. I have only one question to ask; will
your majesty permit me?”

“Certainly. Ask it.”

“Why did not your majesty do his first minister the honor of giving him
notice of this in Paris?”

“You were ill; I was not willing to fatigue you.”

“Never did a labor--never did an explanation fatigue me, sire; and since
the moment is come for me to demand an explanation of my king--”

“Oh, Monsieur Fouquet! an explanation? An explanation, pray, of what?”

“Of your majesty’s intentions with respect to myself.”

The king blushed. “I have been calumniated,” continued Fouquet, warmly,
“and I feel called upon to adjure the justice of the king to make
inquiries.”

“You say all this to me very uselessly, Monsieur Fouquet; I know what I
know.”

“Your majesty can only know the things that have been told to you; and
I, on my part, have said nothing to you, whilst others have spoken many,
many times--”

“What do you wish to say?” said the king, impatient to put an end to
this embarrassing conversation.

“I will go straight to the facts, sire; and I accuse a certain man of
having injured me in your majesty’s opinion.”

“Nobody has injured you, Monsieur Fouquet.”

“That reply proves to me, sire, that I am right.”

“Monsieur Fouquet, I do not like people to be accused.”

“Not when one is accused?”

“We have already spoken too much about this affair.”

“Your majesty will not allow me to justify myself?”

“I repeat that I do not accuse you.”

Fouquet, with a half-bow, made a step backward. “It is certain,” thought
he, “that he has made up his mind. He alone who cannot go back can show
such obstinacy. Not to see the danger now would be to be blind indeed;
not to shun it would be stupid.” He resumed aloud, “Did your majesty
send for me on business?”

“No, Monsieur Fouquet, but for some advice I wish to give you.”

“I respectfully await it, sire.”

“Rest yourself, Monsieur Fouquet, do not throw away your strength; the
session of the States will be short, and when my secretaries shall
have closed it, I do not wish business to be talked of in France for a
fortnight.”

“Has the king nothing to say to me on the subject of this assembly of
the States?”

“No, Monsieur Fouquet.”

“Not to me, the surintendant of the finances?”

“Rest yourself, I beg you; that is all I have to say to you.”

Fouquet bit his lips and hung his head. He was evidently busy with
some uneasy thought. This uneasiness struck the king. “Are you angry at
having to rest yourself, M. Fouquet?” said he.

“Yes, sire, I am not accustomed to take rest.”

“But you are ill; you must take care of yourself.”

“Your majesty spoke just now of a speech to be pronounced to-morrow.”

His majesty made no reply; this unexpected stroke embarrassed him.
Fouquet felt the weight of this hesitation. He thought he could
read danger in the eyes of the young prince, which fear would but
precipitate. “If I appear frightened, I am lost,” thought he.

The king, on his part, was only uneasy at the alarm of Fouquet. “Has he
a suspicion of anything?” murmured he.

“If his first word is severe,” again thought Fouquet; “if he becomes
angry, or feigns to be angry for the sake of a pretext, how shall I
extricate myself? Let us smooth the declivity a little. Gourville was
right.”

“Sire,” said he, suddenly, “since the goodness of the king watches over
my health to the point of dispensing with my labor, may I not be allowed
to be absent from the council of to-morrow? I could pass the day in
bed, and will entreat the king to grant me his physician, that we may
endeavor to find a remedy against this fearful fever.”

“So be it, Monsieur Fouquet, it shall be as you desire; you shall have
a holiday to-morrow, you shall have the physician, and shall be restored
to health.”

“Thanks!” said Fouquet, bowing. Then, opening his game: “Shall I
not have the happiness of conducting your majesty to my residence of
Belle-Isle?”

And he looked Louis full in the face, to judge of the effect of such a
proposal. The king blushed again.

“Do you know,” replied he, endeavoring to smile, “that you have just
said, ‘My residence of Belle-Isle’?”

“Yes, sire.”

“Well! do you not remember,” continued the king in the same cheerful
tone, “that you gave me Belle-Isle?”

“That is true again, sire. Only, as you have not taken it, you will
doubtless come with me and take possession of it.”

“I mean to do so.”

“That was, besides, your majesty’s intention as well as mine; and I
cannot express to your majesty how happy and proud I have been to see
all the king’s regiments from Paris to help take possession.”

The king stammered out that he did not bring the musketeers for that
alone.

“Oh, I am convinced of that,” said Fouquet, warmly; “your majesty knows
very well that you have nothing to do but to come alone with a cane in
your hand, to bring to the ground all the fortifications of Belle-Isle.”

“_Peste!_” cried the king; “I do not wish those fine fortifications,
which cost so much to build, to fall at all. No, let them stand against
the Dutch and English. You would not guess what I want to see at
Belle-Isle, Monsieur Fouquet; it is the pretty peasants and women of
the lands on the sea-shore, who dance so well, and are so seducing
with their scarlet petticoats! I have heard great boast of your pretty
tenants, monsieur le surintendant; well, let me have a sight of them.”

“Whenever your majesty pleases.”

“Have you any means of transport? It shall be to-morrow, if you like.”

The surintendant felt this stroke, which was not adroit, and replied,
“No, sire; I was ignorant of your majesty’s wish; above all, I was
ignorant of your haste to see Belle-Isle, and I am prepared with
nothing.”

“You have a boat of your own, nevertheless?”

“I have five; but they are all in port, or at Paimboeuf; and to join
them, or bring them hither, would require at least twenty-four hours.
Have I any occasion to send a courier? Must I do so?”

“Wait a little, put an end to the fever,--wait till to-morrow.”

“That is true. Who knows but that by to-morrow we may not have a hundred
other ideas?” replied Fouquet, now perfectly convinced and very pale.

The king started, and stretched his hand out towards his little bell,
but Fouquet prevented his ringing.

“Sire,” said he, “I have an ague--I am trembling with cold. If I remain
a moment longer, I shall most likely faint. I request your majesty’s
permission to go and fling myself beneath the bedclothes.”

“Indeed, you are in a shiver; it is painful to behold! Come, Monsieur
Fouquet, begone! I will send to inquire after you.”

“Your majesty overwhelms me with kindness. In an hour I shall be
better.”

“I will call some one to reconduct you,” said the king.

“As you please, sire; I would gladly take the arm of any one.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried the king, ringing his little bell.

“Oh, sire,” interrupted Fouquet, laughing in such a manner as made the
prince feel cold, “would you give me the captain of your musketeers to
take me to my lodgings? An equivocal honor that, sire! A simple footman,
I beg.”

“And why, M. Fouquet? M. d’Artagnan conducts me often, and extremely
well!”

“Yes, but when he conducts you, sire, it is to obey you; whilst me--”

“Go on!”

“If I am obliged to return home supported by the leader of the
musketeers, it would be everywhere said you had had me arrested.”

“Arrested!” replied the king, who became paler than Fouquet
himself,--“arrested! oh!”

“And why should they not say so?” continued Fouquet, still laughing;
“and I would lay a wager there would be people found wicked enough to
laugh at it.” This sally disconcerted the monarch. Fouquet was skillful
enough, or fortunate enough, to make Louis XIV. recoil before the
appearance of the deed he meditated. M. d’Artagnan, when he appeared,
received an order to desire a musketeer to accompany the surintendant.

“Quite unnecessary,” said the latter; “sword for sword; I prefer
Gourville, who is waiting for me below. But that will not prevent me
enjoying the society of M. d’Artagnan. I am glad he will see Belle-Isle,
he is so good a judge of fortifications.”

D’Artagnan bowed, without at all comprehending what was going on.
Fouquet bowed again and left the apartment, affecting all the slowness
of a man who walks with difficulty. When once out of the castle, “I am
saved!” said he. “Oh! yes, disloyal king, you shall see Belle-Isle, but
it shall be when I am no longer there.”

He disappeared, leaving D’Artagnan with the king.

“Captain,” said the king, “you will follow M. Fouquet at the distance of
a hundred paces.”

“Yes, sire.”

“He is going to his lodgings again. You will go with him.”

“Yes, sire.”

“You will arrest him in my name, and will shut him up in a carriage.”

“In a carriage. Well, sire?”

“In such a fashion that he may not, on the road, either converse with
any one or throw notes to people he may meet.”

“That will be rather difficult, sire.”

“Not at all.”

“Pardon me, sire, I cannot stifle M. Fouquet, and if he asks for liberty
to breathe, I cannot prevent him by closing both the windows and
the blinds. He will throw out at the doors all the cries and notes
possible.”

“The case is provided for, Monsieur d’Artagnan; a carriage with a
trellis will obviate both the difficulties you point out.”

“A carriage with an iron trellis!” cried D’Artagnan; “but a carriage
with an iron trellis is not made in half an hour, and your majesty
commands me to go immediately to M. Fouquet’s lodgings.”

“The carriage in question is already made.”

“Ah! that is quite a different thing,” said the captain; “if the
carriage is ready made, very well, then, we have only to set it in
motion.”

“It is ready--and the horses harnessed.”

“Ah!”

“And the coachman, with the outriders, is waiting in the lower court of
the castle.”

D’Artagnan bowed. “There only remains for me to ask your majesty whither
I shall conduct M. Fouquet.”

“To the castle of Angers, at first.”

“Very well, sire.”

“Afterwards we will see.”

“Yes, sire.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan, one last word: you have remarked that, for making
this capture of M. Fouquet, I have not employed my guards, on which
account M. de Gesvres will be furious.”

“Your majesty does not employ your guards,” said the captain, a little
humiliated, “because you mistrust M. de Gesvres, that is all.”

“That is to say, monsieur, that I have more confidence in you.”

“I know that very well, sire! and it is of no use to make so much of
it.”

“It is only for the sake of arriving at this, monsieur, that if, from
this moment, it should happen that by any chance whatever M. Fouquet
should escape--such chances have been, monsieur--”

“Oh! very often, sire; but for others, not for me.”

“And why not with you?”

“Because I, sire, have, for an instant, wished to save M. Fouquet.”

The king started. “Because,” continued the captain, “I had then a right
to do so, having guessed your majesty’s plan, without you having spoken
to me of it, and that I took an interest in M. Fouquet. Now, was I not
at liberty to show my interest in this man?”

“In truth, monsieur, you do not reassure me with regard to your
services.”

“If I had saved him then, I should have been perfectly innocent; I will
say more, I should have done well, for M. Fouquet is not a bad man. But
he was not willing; his destiny prevailed; he let the hour of liberty
slip by. So much the worse! Now I have orders, I will obey those orders,
and M. Fouquet you may consider as a man arrested. He is at the castle
of Angers, this very M. Fouquet.”

“Oh! you have not got him yet, captain.”

“That concerns me; every one to his trade, sire; only, once more,
reflect! Do you seriously give me orders to arrest M. Fouquet, sire?”

“Yes, a thousand times, yes!”

“In writing, sire, then.”

“Here is the order.”

D’Artagnan read it, bowed to the king, and left the room. From the
height of the terrace he perceived Gourville, who went by with a joyous
air towards the lodgings of M. Fouquet.



CHAPTER XL.
The White Horse and the Black.

“That is rather surprising,” said D’Artagnan; “Gourville running about
the streets so gayly, when he is almost certain that M. Fouquet is in
danger; when it is almost equally certain that it was Gourville who
warned M. Fouquet just now by the note which was torn into a thousand
pieces upon the terrace, and given to the winds by monsieur le
surintendant. Gourville is rubbing his hands; that is because he has
done something clever. Whence comes M. Gourville? Gourville is coming
from the Rue aux Herbes. Whither does the Rue aux Herbes lead?” And
D’Artagnan followed, along the tops of the houses of Nantes, dominated
by the castle, the line traced by the streets, as he would have done
upon a topographical plan; only, instead of the dead, flat paper, the
living chart rose in relief with the cries, the movements, and the
shadows of men and things. Beyond the inclosure of the city, the great
verdant plains stretched out, bordering the Loire, and appeared to run
towards the pink horizon, which was cut by the azure of the waters and
the dark green of the marshes. Immediately outside the gates of Nantes
two white roads were seen diverging like separate fingers of a gigantic
hand. D’Artagnan, who had taken in all the panorama at a glance by
crossing the terrace, was led by the line of the Rue aux Herbes to
the mouth of one of those roads which took its rise under the gates of
Nantes. One step more, and he was about to descend the stairs, take
his trellised carriage, and go towards the lodgings of M. Fouquet. But
chance decreed, at the moment of plunging into the staircase, that he
was attracted by a moving point then gaining ground upon that road.

“What is that?” said the musketeer to himself; “a horse galloping,--a
runaway horse, no doubt. What a rate he is going at!” The moving point
became detached from the road, and entered into the fields. “A white
horse,” continued the captain, who had just observed the color thrown
luminously against the dark ground, “and he is mounted; it must be some
boy whose horse is thirsty and has run away with him.”

These reflections, rapid as lightning, simultaneous with visual
perception, D’Artagnan had already forgotten when he descended the
first steps of the staircase. Some morsels of paper were spread over the
stairs, and shone out white against the dirty stones. “Eh! eh!” said the
captain to himself, “here are some of the fragments of the note torn by
M. Fouquet. Poor man! he has given his secret to the wind; the wind will
have no more to do with it, and brings it back to the king. Decidedly,
Fouquet, you play with misfortune! the game is not a fair one,--fortune
is against you. The star of Louis XIV. obscures yours; the adder is
stronger and more cunning than the squirrel.” D’Artagnan picked up one
of these morsels of paper as he descended. “Gourville’s pretty little
hand!” cried he, whilst examining one of the fragments of the note; “I
was not mistaken.” And he read the word “horse.” “Stop!” said he; and he
examined another, upon which there was not a letter traced. Upon a third
he read the word “white;” “white horse,” repeated he, like a child that
is spelling. “Ah, _mordioux!_” cried the suspicious spirit, “a white
horse!” And, like that grain of powder which, burning, dilates into
ten thousand times its volume, D’Artagnan, enlightened by ideas and
suspicions, rapidly reascended the stairs towards the terrace. The
white horse was still galloping in the direction of the Loire, at the
extremity of which, melting into the vapors of the water, a little
sail appeared, wave-balanced like a water-butterfly. “Oh!” cried the
musketeer, “only a man who wants to fly would go at that pace across
plowed lands; there is but one Fouquet, a financier, to ride thus in
open day upon a white horse; there is no one but the lord of Belle-Isle
who would make his escape towards the sea, while there are such thick
forests on land, and there is but one D’Artagnan in the world to catch
M. Fouquet, who has half an hour’s start, and who will have gained his
boat within an hour.” This being said, the musketeer gave orders that
the carriage with the iron trellis should be taken immediately to a
thicket situated just outside the city. He selected his best horse,
jumped upon his back, galloped along the Rue aux Herbes, taking, not the
road Fouquet had taken, but the bank itself of the Loire, certain
that he should gain ten minutes upon the total distance, and, at the
intersection of the two lines, come up with the fugitive, who could have
no suspicion of being pursued in that direction. In the rapidity of the
pursuit, and with the impatience of the avenger, animating himself as in
war, D’Artagnan, so mild, so kind towards Fouquet, was surprised to find
himself become ferocious--almost sanguinary. For a long time he galloped
without catching sight of the white horse. His rage assumed fury, he
doubted himself,--he suspected that Fouquet had buried himself in some
subterranean road, or that he had changed the white horse for one of
those famous black ones, as swift as the wind, which D’Artagnan, at
Saint-Mande, had so frequently admired and envied for their vigor and
their fleetness.

At such moments, when the wind cut his eyes so as to make the tears
spring from them, when the saddle had become burning hot, when the
galled and spurred horse reared with pain, and threw behind him a shower
of dust and stones, D’Artagnan, raising himself in his stirrups, and
seeing nothing on the waters, nothing beneath the trees, looked up into
the air like a madman. He was losing his senses. In the paroxysms of
eagerness he dreamt of aerial ways,--the discovery of the following century;
he called to his mind Daedalus and the vast wings that had saved him
from the prisons of Crete. A hoarse sigh broke from his lips, as he
repeated, devoured by the fear of ridicule, “I! I! duped by a Gourville!
I! They will say that I am growing old,--they will say I have received a
million to allow Fouquet to escape!” And he again dug his spurs into the
sides of his horse: he had ridden astonishingly fast. Suddenly, at the
extremity of some open pasture-ground, behind the hedges, he saw a white
form which showed itself, disappeared, and at last remained distinctly
visible against the rising ground. D’Artagnan’s heart leaped with joy.
He wiped the streaming sweat from his brow, relaxed the tension of his
knees,--by which the horse breathed more freely,--and, gathering up his
reins, moderated the speed of the vigorous animal, his active accomplice
on this man-hunt. He had then time to study the direction of the
road, and his position with regard to Fouquet. The superintendent had
completely winded his horse by crossing the soft ground. He felt the
necessity of gaining a firmer footing, and turned towards the road by
the shortest secant line. D’Artagnan, on his part, had nothing to do but
to ride straight on, concealed by the sloping shore; so that he would
cut his quarry off the road when he came up with him. Then the real race
would begin,--then the struggle would be in earnest.

D’Artagnan gave his horse good breathing-time. He observed that the
superintendent had relaxed into a trot, which was to say, he, too, was
favoring his horse. But both of them were too much pressed for time to
allow them to continue long at that pace. The white horse sprang off
like an arrow the moment his feet touched firm ground. D’Artagnan
dropped his head, and his black horse broke into a gallop. Both followed
the same route; the quadruple echoes of this new race-course were
confounded. Fouquet had not yet perceived D’Artagnan. But on issuing
from the slope, a single echo struck the air; it was that of the steps
of D’Artagnan’s horse, which rolled along like thunder. Fouquet turned
round, and saw behind him, within a hundred paces, his enemy bent over
the neck of his horse. There could be no doubt--the shining baldrick,
the red cassock--it was a musketeer. Fouquet slackened his hand
likewise, and the white horse placed twenty feet more between his
adversary and himself.

“Oh, but,” thought D’Artagnan, becoming very anxious, “that is not
a common horse M. Fouquet is upon--let us see!” And he attentively
examined with his infallible eye the shape and capabilities of the
courser. Round full quarters--a thin long tail--large hocks--thin legs,
as dry as bars of steel--hoofs hard as marble. He spurred his own, but
the distance between the two remained the same. D’Artagnan listened
attentively; not a breath of the horse reached him, and yet he seemed
to cut the air. The black horse, on the contrary, began to puff like any
blacksmith’s bellows.

“I must overtake him, if I kill my horse,” thought the musketeer; and he
began to saw the mouth of the poor animal, whilst he buried the rowels
of his merciless spurs into his sides. The maddened horse gained twenty
toises, and came up within pistol-shot of Fouquet.

“Courage!” said the musketeer to himself, “courage! the white horse will
perhaps grow weaker, and if the horse does not fall, the master must
pull up at last.” But horse and rider remained upright together, gaining
ground by difficult degrees. D’Artagnan uttered a wild cry, which made
Fouquet turn round, and added speed to the white horse.

“A famous horse! a mad rider!” growled the captain. “Hola! _mordioux!_
Monsieur Fouquet! stop! in the king’s name!” Fouquet made no reply.

“Do you hear me?” shouted D’Artagnan, whose horse had just stumbled.

“_Pardieu!_” replied Fouquet, laconically; and rode on faster.

D’Artagnan was nearly mad; the blood rushed boiling to his temples and
his eyes. “In the king’s name!” cried he again, “stop, or I will bring
you down with a pistol-shot!”

“Do!” replied Fouquet, without relaxing his speed.

D’Artagnan seized a pistol and cocked it, hoping that the double click
of the spring would stop his enemy. “You have pistols likewise,” said
he, “turn and defend yourself.”

Fouquet did turn round at the noise, and looking D’Artagnan full in the
face, opened, with his right hand, the part of his dress which concealed
his body, but he did not even touch his holsters. There were not more
than twenty paces between the two.

“_Mordioux!_” said D’Artagnan, “I will not assassinate you; if you will
not fire upon me, surrender! what is a prison?”

“I would rather die!” replied Fouquet; “I shall suffer less.”

D’Artagnan, drunk with despair, hurled his pistol to the ground. “I
will take you alive!” said he; and by a prodigy of skill which this
incomparable horseman alone was capable, he threw his horse forward to
within ten paces of the white horse; already his hand was stretched out
to seize his prey.

“Kill me! kill me!” cried Fouquet, “‘twould be more humane!”

“No! alive--alive!” murmured the captain.

At this moment his horse made a false step for the second time, and
Fouquet’s again took the lead. It was an unheard-of spectacle, this
race between two horses which now only kept alive by the will of their
riders. It might be said that D’Artagnan rode, carrying his horse along
between his knees. To the furious gallop had succeeded the fast trot,
and that had sunk to what might be scarcely called a trot at all.
But the chase appeared equally warm in the two fatigued _athletoe_.
D’Artagnan, quite in despair, seized his second pistol, and cocked it.

“At your horse! not at you!” cried he to Fouquet. And he fired. The
animal was hit in the quarters--he made a furious bound, and plunged
forward. At that moment D’Artagnan’s horse fell dead.

“I am dishonored!” thought the musketeer; “I am a miserable wretch! for
pity’s sake, M. Fouquet, throw me one of your pistols, that I may blow
out my brains!” But Fouquet rode away.

“For mercy’s sake! for mercy’s sake!” cried D’Artagnan; “that which you
will not do at this moment, I myself will do within an hour, but here,
upon this road, I should die bravely; I should die esteemed; do me that
service, M. Fouquet!”

M. Fouquet made no reply, but continued to trot on. D’Artagnan began to
run after his enemy. Successively he threw away his hat, his coat, which
embarrassed him, and then the sheath of his sword, which got between his
legs as he was running. The sword in his hand itself became too heavy,
and he threw it after the sheath. The white horse began to rattle in
its throat; D’Artagnan gained upon him. From a trot the exhausted animal
sunk to a staggering walk--the foam from his mouth was mixed with blood.
D’Artagnan made a desperate effort, sprang towards Fouquet, and seized
him by the leg, saying in a broken, breathless voice, “I arrest you in
the king’s name! blow my brains out, if you like; we have both done our
duty.”

Fouquet hurled far from him, into the river, the two pistols D’Artagnan
might have seized, and dismounting from his horse--“I am your prisoner,
monsieur,” said he; “will you take my arm, for I see you are ready to
faint?”

“Thanks!” murmured D’Artagnan, who, in fact, felt the earth sliding from
under his feet, and the light of day turning to blackness around him;
then he rolled upon the sand, without breath or strength. Fouquet
hastened to the brink of the river, dipped some water in his hat, with
which he bathed the temples of the musketeer, and introduced a few drop
between his lips. D’Artagnan raised himself with difficulty, and looked
about him with a wandering eye. He beheld Fouquet on his knees, with his
wet hat in his hand, smiling upon him with ineffable sweetness. “You are
not off, then?” cried he. “Oh, monsieur! the true king of royalty,
in heart, in soul, is not Louis of the Louvre, or Philippe of
Sainte-Marguerite; it is you, proscribed, condemned!”

“I, who this day am ruined by a single error, M. d’Artagnan.”

“What, in the name of Heaven, is that?”

“I should have had you for a friend! But how shall we return to Nantes?
We are a great way from it.”

“That is true,” said D’Artagnan, gloomily.

“The white horse will recover, perhaps; he is a good horse! Mount,
Monsieur d’Artagnan; I will walk till you have rested a little.”

“Poor beast! and wounded, too?” said the musketeer.

“He will go, I tell you; I know him; but we can do better still, let us
both get up, and ride slowly.”

“We can try,” said the captain. But they had scarcely charged the animal
with this double load, when he began to stagger, and then with a great
effort walked a few minutes, then staggered again, and sank down dead by
the side of the black horse, which he had just managed to come up to.

“We will go on foot--destiny wills it so--the walk will be pleasant,”
 said Fouquet, passing his arm through that of D’Artagnan.

“_Mordioux!_” cried the latter, with a fixed eye, a contracted brow, and
a swelling heart--“What a disgraceful day!”

They walked slowly the four leagues which separated them from the little
wood behind which the carriage and escort were in waiting. When Fouquet
perceived that sinister machine, he said to D’Artagnan, who cast down
his eyes, ashamed of Louis XIV., “There is an idea that did not emanate
from a brave man, Captain d’Artagnan; it is not yours. What are these
gratings for?” said he.

“To prevent your throwing letters out.”

“Ingenious!”

“But you can speak, if you cannot write,” said D’Artagnan.

“Can I speak to you?”

“Why, certainly, if you wish to do so.”

Fouquet reflected for a moment, then looking the captain full in the
face, “One single word,” said he; “will you remember it?”

“I will not forget it.”

“Will you speak it to whom I wish?”

“I will.”

“Saint-Mande,” articulated Fouquet, in a low voice.

“Well! and for whom?”

“For Madame de Belliere or Pelisson.”

“It shall be done.”

The carriage rolled through Nantes, and took the route to Angers.



CHAPTER XLI.
In Which the Squirrel Falls,--the Adder Flies.

It was two o’clock in the afternoon. The king, full of impatience,
went to his cabinet on the terrace, and kept opening the door of the
corridor, to see what his secretaries were doing. M. Colbert, seated in
the same place M. de Saint-Aignan had so long occupied in the morning,
was chatting in a low voice with M. de Brienne. The king opened the door
suddenly, and addressed them. “What is it you are saying?”

“We were speaking of the first sitting of the States,” said M. de
Brienne, rising.

“Very well,” replied the king, and returned to his room.

Five minutes after, the summons of the bell recalled Rose, whose hour it
was.

“Have you finished your copies?” asked the king.

“Not yet, sire.”

“See if M. d’Artagnan has returned.”

“Not yet, sire.”

“It is very strange,” murmured the king. “Call M. Colbert.”

Colbert entered; he had been expecting this all the morning.

“Monsieur Colbert,” said the king, very sharply; “you must ascertain
what has become of M. d’Artagnan.”

Colbert in his calm voice replied, “Where does your majesty desire him
to be sought for?”

“Eh! monsieur! do you not know on what I have sent him?” replied Louis,
acrimoniously.

“Your majesty did not inform me.”

“Monsieur, there are things that must be guessed; and you, above all,
are apt to guess them.”

“I might have been able to imagine, sire; but I do not presume to be
positive.”

Colbert had not finished these words when a rougher voice than that of
the king interrupted the interesting conversation thus begun between the
monarch and his clerk.

“D’Artagnan!” cried the king, with evident joy.

D’Artagnan, pale and in evidently bad humor, cried to the king, as
he entered, “Sire, is it your majesty who has given orders to my
musketeers?”

“What orders?” said the king.

“About M. Fouquet’s house?”

“None!” replied Louis.

“Ha!” said D’Artagnan, biting his mustache; “I was not mistaken, then;
it was monsieur here;” and he pointed to Colbert.

“What orders? Let me know,” said the king.

“Orders to turn the house topsy-turvy, to beat M. Fouquet’s servants, to
force the drawers, to give over a peaceful house to pillage! _Mordioux!_
these are savage orders!”

“Monsieur!” said Colbert, turning pale.

“Monsieur,” interrupted D’Artagnan, “the king alone, understand,--the
king alone has a right to command my musketeers; but, as to you, I
forbid you to do it, and I tell you so before his majesty; gentlemen who
carry swords do not sling pens behind their ears.”

“D’Artagnan! D’Artagnan!” murmured the king.

“It is humiliating,” continued the musketeer; “my soldiers are
disgraced. I do not command _reitres_, thank you, nor clerks of the
intendant, _mordioux!_”

“Well! but what is all this about?” said the king with authority.

“About this, sire; monsieur--monsieur, who could not guess your
majesty’s orders, and consequently could not know I was gone to arrest
M. Fouquet; monsieur, who has caused the iron cage to be constructed for
his patron of yesterday--has sent M. de Roncherolles to the lodgings
of M. Fouquet, and, under the pretense of securing the surintendant’s
papers, they have taken away the furniture. My musketeers have been
posted round the house all the morning; such were my orders. Why did any
one presume to order them to enter? Why, by forcing them to assist in
this pillage, have they been made accomplices in it? _Mordioux!_ we
serve the king, we do; but we do not serve M. Colbert!”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the king, sternly, “take care; it is not in
my presence that such explanations, and made in such a tone, should take
place.”

“I have acted for the good of the king,” said Colbert, in a faltering
voice. “It is hard to be so treated by one of your majesty’s officers,
and that without redress, on account of the respect I owe the king.”

“The respect you owe the king,” cried D’Artagnan, his eyes flashing
fire, “consists, in the first place, in making his authority respected,
and his person beloved. Every agent of a power without control
represents that power, and when people curse the hand which strikes
them, it is the royal hand that God reproaches, do you hear? Must a
soldier, hardened by forty years of wounds and blood, give you this
lesson, monsieur? Must mercy be on my side, and ferocity on yours? You
have caused the innocent to be arrested, bound, and imprisoned!”

“Accomplices, perhaps, of M. Fouquet,” said Colbert.

“Who told you M. Fouquet had accomplices, or even that he was guilty?
The king alone knows that; his justice is not blind! When he says,
‘Arrest and imprison’ such and such a man, he is obeyed. Do not talk to
me, then, any more of the respect you owe the king, and be careful of
your words, that they may not chance to convey the slightest menace;
for the king will not allow those to be threatened who do him service
by others who do him disservice; and if in case I should have, which God
forbid! a master so ungrateful, I would make myself respected.”

Thus saying, D’Artagnan took his station haughtily in the king’s
cabinet, his eyes flashing, his hand on his sword, his lips trembling,
affecting much more anger than he really felt. Colbert, humiliated and
devoured with rage, bowed to the king as if to ask his permission to
leave the room. The king, thwarted alike in pride and in curiosity, knew
not which part to take. D’Artagnan saw him hesitate. To remain longer
would have been a mistake: it was necessary to score a triumph over
Colbert, and the only method was to touch the king so near the quick,
that his majesty would have no other means of extrication but choosing
between the two antagonists. D’Artagnan bowed as Colbert had done; but
the king, who, in preference to everything else, was anxious to have all
the exact details of the arrest of the surintendant of the finances from
him who had made him tremble for a moment,--the king, perceiving that
the ill-humor of D’Artagnan would put off for half an hour at least the
details he was burning to be acquainted with,--Louis, we say, forgot
Colbert, who had nothing new to tell him, and recalled his captain of
the musketeers.

“In the first place,” said he, “let me see the result of your
commission, monsieur; you may rest yourself hereafter.”

D’Artagnan, who was just passing through the doorway, stopped at the
voice of the king, retraced his steps, and Colbert was forced to leave
the closet. His countenance assumed almost a purple hue, his black and
threatening eyes shone with a dark fire beneath their thick brows; he
stepped out, bowed before the king, half drew himself up in passing
D’Artagnan, and went away with death in his heart. D’Artagnan, on
being left alone with the king, softened immediately, and composing his
countenance: “Sire,” said he, “you are a young king. It is by the dawn
that people judge whether the day will be fine or dull. How, sire, will
the people, whom the hand of God has placed under your law, argue
of your reign, if between them and you, you allow angry and violent
ministers to interpose their mischief? But let us speak of myself, sire,
let us leave a discussion that may appear idle, and perhaps inconvenient
to you. Let us speak of myself. I have arrested M. Fouquet.”

“You took plenty of time about it,” said the king, sharply.

D’Artagnan looked at the king. “I perceive that I have expressed
myself badly. I announced to your majesty that I had arrested Monsieur
Fouquet.”

“You did; and what then?”

“Well! I ought to have told your majesty that M. Fouquet had arrested
me; that would have been more just. I re-establish the truth, then; I
have been arrested by M. Fouquet.”

It was now the turn of Louis XIV. to be surprised. His majesty was
astonished in his turn.

D’Artagnan, with his quick glance, appreciated what was passing in the
heart of his master. He did not allow him time to put any questions. He
related, with that poetry, that picturesqueness, which perhaps he
alone possessed at that period, the escape of Fouquet, the pursuit,
the furious race, and, lastly, the inimitable generosity of the
surintendant, who might have fled ten times over, who might have killed
the adversary in the pursuit, but who had preferred imprisonment,
perhaps worse, to the humiliation of one who wished to rob him of his
liberty. In proportion as the tale advanced, the king became agitated,
devouring the narrator’s words, and drumming with his finger-nails upon
the table.

“It results from all this, sire, in my eyes, at least, that the man who
conducts himself thus is a gallant man, and cannot be an enemy to the
king. That is my opinion, and I repeat it to your majesty. I know what
the king will say to me, and I bow to it,--reasons of state. So be it!
To my ears that sounds highly respectable. But I am a soldier, and I
have received my orders, my orders are executed--very unwillingly on my
part, it is true, but they are executed. I say no more.”

“Where is M. Fouquet at this moment?” asked Louis, after a short
silence.

“M. Fouquet, sire,” replied D’Artagnan, “is in the iron cage that M.
Colbert had prepared for him, and is galloping as fast as four strong
horses can drag him, towards Angers.”

“Why did you leave him on the road?”

“Because your majesty did not tell me to go to Angers. The proof, the
best proof of what I advance, is that the king desired me to be sought
for but this minute. And then I had another reason.”

“What is that?”

“Whilst I was with him, poor M. Fouquet would never attempt to escape.”

“Well!” cried the king, astonished.

“Your majesty ought to understand, and does understand, certainly, that
my warmest wish is to know that M. Fouquet is at liberty. I have
given him one of my brigadiers, the most stupid I could find among my
musketeers, in order that the prisoner might have a chance of escaping.”

“Are you mad, Monsieur d’Artagnan?” cried the king, crossing his arms
on his breast. “Do people utter such enormities, even when they have the
misfortune to think them?”

“Ah! sire, you cannot expect that I should be an enemy to M. Fouquet,
after what he has just done for you and me. No, no; if you desire that
he should remain under your lock and bolt, never give him in charge to
me; however closely wired might be the cage, the bird would, in the end,
take wing.”

“I am surprised,” said the king, in his sternest tone, “you did not
follow the fortunes of the man M. Fouquet wished to place upon my
throne. You had in him all you want--affection, gratitude. In my
service, monsieur, you will only find a master.”

“If M. Fouquet had not gone to seek you in the Bastile, sire,” replied
D’Artagnan, with a deeply impressive manner, “one single man would have
gone there, and I should have been that man--you know that right well,
sire.”

The king was brought to a pause. Before that speech of his captain of
the musketeers, so frankly spoken and so true, the king had nothing to
offer. On hearing D’Artagnan, Louis remembered the D’Artagnan of former
times; him who, at the Palais Royal, held himself concealed behind the
curtains of his bed, when the people of Paris, led by Cardinal de Retz,
came to assure themselves of the presence of the king; the D’Artagnan
whom he saluted with his hand at the door of his carriage, when
repairing to Notre Dame on his return to Paris; the soldier who had
quitted his service at Blois; the lieutenant he had recalled to be
beside his person when the death of Mazarin restored his power; the man
he had always found loyal, courageous, devoted. Louis advanced towards
the door and called Colbert. Colbert had not left the corridor where the
secretaries were at work. He reappeared.

“Colbert, did you make a perquisition on the house of M. Fouquet?”

“Yes, sire.”

“What has it produced?”

“M. de Roncherolles, who was sent with your majesty’s musketeers, has
remitted me some papers,” replied Colbert.

“I will look at them. Give me your hand.”

“My hand, sire!”

“Yes, that I may place it in that of M. d’Artagnan. In fact, M.
d’Artagnan,” added he, with a smile, turning towards the soldier, who,
at sight of the clerk, had resumed his haughty attitude, “you do not
know this man; make his acquaintance.” And he pointed to Colbert. “He
has been made but a moderately valuable servant in subaltern positions,
but he will be a great man if I raise him to the foremost rank.”

“Sire!” stammered Colbert, confused with pleasure and fear.

“I always understood why,” murmured D’Artagnan in the king’s ear; “he
was jealous.”

“Precisely, and his jealousy confined his wings.”

“He will henceforward be a winged-serpent,” grumbled the musketeer, with
a remnant of hatred against his recent adversary.

But Colbert, approaching him, offered to his eyes a physiognomy so
different from that which he had been accustomed to see him wear; he
appeared so good, so mild, so easy; his eyes took the expression of an
intelligence so noble, that D’Artagnan, a connoisseur in physiognomies,
was moved, and almost changed in his convictions. Colbert pressed his
hand.

“That which the king has just told you, monsieur, proves how well
his majesty is acquainted with men. The inveterate opposition I have
displayed, up to this day, against abuses and not against men, proves
that I had it in view to prepare for my king a glorious reign, for my
country a great blessing. I have many ideas, M. d’Artagnan. You will
see them expand in the sun of public peace; and if I have not the good
fortune to conquer the friendship of honest men, I am at least certain,
monsieur, that I shall obtain their esteem. For their admiration,
monsieur, I would give my life.”

This change, this sudden elevation, this mute approbation of the king,
gave the musketeer matter for profound reflection. He bowed civilly to
Colbert, who did not take his eyes off him. The king, when he saw they
were reconciled, dismissed them. They left the room together. As soon
as they were out of the cabinet, the new minister, stopping the captain,
said:

“Is it possible, M. d’Artagnan, that with such an eye as yours, you did
not, at the first glance, at the first impression, discover what sort of
man I am?”

“Monsieur Colbert,” replied the musketeer, “a ray of the sun in our eyes
prevents us from seeing the most vivid flame. The man in power radiates,
you know; and since you are there, why should you continue to persecute
him who had just fallen into disgrace, and fallen from such a height?”

“I, monsieur!” said Colbert; “oh, monsieur! I would never persecute
him. I wished to administer the finances and to administer them alone,
because I am ambitious, and, above all, because I have the most entire
confidence in my own merit; because I know that all the gold of this
country will ebb and flow beneath my eyes, and I love to look at the
king’s gold; because, if I live thirty years, in thirty years not a
_denir_ of it will remain in my hands; because, with that gold, I will
build granaries, castles, cities, and harbors; because I will create a
marine, I will equip navies that shall waft the name of France to the
most distant people; because I will create libraries and academies;
because I will make France the first country in the world, and the
wealthiest. These are the motives for my animosity against M. Fouquet,
who prevented my acting. And then, when I shall be great and strong,
when France is great and strong, in my turn, then, will I cry, ‘Mercy’!”

“Mercy, did you say? then ask his liberty of the king. The king is only
crushing him on _your_ account.”

Colbert again raised his head. “Monsieur,” said he, “you know that is
not so, and that the king has his own personal animosity against M.
Fouquet; it is not for me to teach you that.”

“But the king will grow tired; he will forget.”

“The king never forgets, M. d’Artagnan. Hark! the king calls. He is
going to issue an order. I have not influenced him, have I? Listen.”

The king, in fact, was calling his secretaries. “Monsieur d’Artagnan,”
 said he.

“I am here, sire.”

“Give twenty of your musketeers to M. de Saint-Aignan, to form a guard
for M. Fouquet.”

D’Artagnan and Colbert exchanged looks. “And from Angers,” continued the
king, “they will conduct the prisoner to the Bastile, in Paris.”

“You were right,” said the captain to the minister.

“Saint-Aignan,” continued the king, “you will have any one shot who
shall attempt to speak privately with M. Fouquet, during the journey.”

“But myself, sire,” said the duke.

“You, monsieur, you will only speak to him in the presence of the
musketeers.” The duke bowed and departed to execute his commission.

D’Artagnan was about to retire likewise; but the king stopped him.

“Monsieur,” said he, “you will go immediately, and take possession of
the isle and fief of Belle-Ile-en-Mer.”

“Yes, sire. Alone?”

“You will take a sufficient number of troops to prevent delay, in case
the place should be contumacious.”

A murmur of courtly incredulity rose from the group of courtiers. “That
shall be done,” said D’Artagnan.

“I saw the place in my infancy,” resumed the king, “and I do not wish to
see it again. You have heard me? Go, monsieur, and do not return without
the keys.”

Colbert went up to D’Artagnan. “A commission which, if you carry it out
well,” said he, “will be worth a marechal’s baton to you.”

“Why do you employ the words, ‘if you carry it out well’?”

“Because it is difficult.”

“Ah! in what respect?”

“You have friends in Belle-Isle, Monsieur d’Artagnan; and it is not an
easy thing for men like you to march over the bodies of their friends to
obtain success.”

D’Artagnan hung his head in deepest thought, whilst Colbert returned to
the king. A quarter of an hour after, the captain received the written
order from the king, to blow up the fortress of Belle-Isle, in case of
resistance, with power of life and death over all the inhabitants or
refugees, and an injunction not to allow one to escape.

“Colbert was right,” thought D’Artagnan; “for me the baton of a marechal
of France will cost the lives of my two friends. Only they seem to
forget that my friends are not more stupid than the birds, and that they
will not wait for the hand of the fowler to extend over their wings.
I will show them that hand so plainly, that they will have quite time
enough to see it. Poor Porthos! Poor Aramis! No; my fortune should shall
not cost your wings a feather.”

Having thus determined, D’Artagnan assembled the royal army, embarked it
at Paimboeuf, and set sail, without the loss of an unnecessary minute.



CHAPTER XLII.
Belle-Ile-en-Mer.

At the extremity of the mole, against which the furious sea beats at the
evening tide, two men, holding each other by the arm, were conversing
in an animated and expansive tone, without the possibility of any other
human being hearing their words, borne away, as they were, one by one,
by the gusts of wind, with the white foam swept from the crests of the
waves. The sun had just gone down in the vast sheet of the crimsoned
ocean, like a gigantic crucible. From time to time, one of these men,
turning towards the east, cast an anxious, inquiring look over the sea.
The other, interrogating the features of his companion, seemed to seek
for information in his looks. Then, both silent, busied with dismal
thoughts, they resumed their walk. Every one has already perceived that
these two men were our proscribed heroes, Porthos and Aramis, who had
taken refuge in Belle-Isle, since the ruin of their hopes, since the
discomfiture of the colossal schemes of M. d’Herblay.

“If is of no use your saying anything to the contrary, my dear Aramis,”
 repeated Porthos, inhaling vigorously the salt breeze with which he
charged his massive chest, “It is of no use, Aramis. The disappearance
of all the fishing-boats that went out two days ago is not an ordinary
circumstance. There has been no storm at sea; the weather has been
constantly calm, not even the lightest gale; and even if we had had
a tempest, all our boats would not have foundered. I repeat, it is
strange. This complete disappearance astonishes me, I tell you.”

“True,” murmured Aramis. “You are right, friend Porthos; it is true,
there is something strange in it.”

“And further,” added Porthos, whose ideas the assent of the bishop of
Vannes seemed to enlarge; “and, further, do you not observe that if the
boats have perished, not a single plank has washed ashore?”

“I have remarked it as well as yourself.”

“And do you not think it strange that the two only boats we had left in
the whole island, and which I sent in search of the others--”

Aramis here interrupted his companion by a cry, and by so sudden a
movement, that Porthos stopped as if he were stupefied. “What do you
say, Porthos? What!--You have sent the two boats--”

“In search of the others! Yes, to be sure I have,” replied Porthos,
calmly.

“Unhappy man! What have you done? Then we are indeed lost,” cried the
bishop.

“Lost!--what did you say?” exclaimed the terrified Porthos. “How lost,
Aramis? How are we lost?”

Aramis bit his lips. “Nothing! nothing! Your pardon, I meant to say--”

“What?”

“That if we were inclined--if we took a fancy to make an excursion by
sea, we could not.”

“Very good! and why should that vex you? A precious pleasure, _ma foi!_
For my part, I don’t regret it at all. What I regret is certainly not
the more or less amusement we can find at Belle-Isle: what I regret,
Aramis, is Pierrefonds; Bracieux; le Vallon; beautiful France! Here, we
are not in France, my dear friend; we are--I know not where. Oh! I
tell you, in full sincerity of soul, and your affection will excuse my
frankness, but I declare to you I am not happy at Belle-Isle. No; in
good truth, I am not happy!”

Aramis breathed a long, but stifled sigh. “Dear friend,” replied he:
“that is why it is so sad a thing you have sent the two boats we had
left in search of the boats which disappeared two days ago. If you had
not sent them away, we would have departed.”

“‘Departed!’ And the orders, Aramis?”

“What orders?”

“_Parbleu!_ Why, the orders you have been constantly, in and out of
season, repeating to me--that we were to hold Belle-Isle against the
usurper. You know very well!”

“That is true!” murmured Aramis again.

“You see, then, plainly, my friend, that we could not depart; and that
the sending away of the boats in search of the others cannot prove
prejudicial to us in the very least.”

Aramis was silent; and his vague glances, luminous as that of an
albatross, hovered for a long time over the sea, interrogating space,
seeking to pierce the very horizon.

“With all that, Aramis,” continued Porthos, who adhered to his idea,
and that the more closely from the bishop having apparently endorsed
it,--“with all that, you give me no explanation about what can have
happened to these unfortunate boats. I am assailed by cries and
complaints whichever way I go. The children cry to see the desolation of
the women, as if I could restore the absent husbands and fathers. What
do you suppose, my friend, and how ought I to answer them?”

“Think all you like, my good Porthos, and say nothing.”

This reply did not satisfy Porthos at all. He turned away grumbling
something in ill-humor. Aramis stopped the valiant musketeer. “Do you
remember,” said he, in a melancholy tone, kneading the two hands of the
giant between his own with affectionate cordiality, “do you remember,
my friend, that in the glorious days of youth--do you remember, Porthos,
when we were all strong and valiant--we, and the other two--if we had
then had an inclination to return to France, do you think this sheet of
salt water would have stopped us?”

“Oh!” said Porthos; “but six leagues.”

“If you had seen me get astride of a plank, would you have remained on
land, Porthos?”

“No, _pardieu!_ No, Aramis. But, nowadays, what sort of a plank should
we want, my friend! I, in particular.” And the Seigneur de Bracieux cast
a profound glance over his colossal rotundity with a loud laugh. “And do
you mean seriously to say you are not tired of Belle-Isle a little,
and that you would not prefer the comforts of your dwelling--of your
episcopal palace, at Vannes? Come, confess.”

“No,” replied Aramis, without daring to look at Porthos.

“Let us stay where we are, then,” said his friend, with a sigh, which,
in spite of the efforts he made to restrain it, escaped his echoing
breast. “Let us remain!--let us remain! And yet,” added he, “and yet,
if we seriously wished, but that decidedly--if we had a fixed idea, one
firmly taken, to return to France, and there were not boats--”

“Have you remarked another thing, my friend--that is, since the
disappearance of our barks, during the last two days’ absence of
fishermen, not a single small boat has landed on the shores of the
isle?”

“Yes, certainly! you are right. I, too, have remarked it, and the
observation was the more naturally made, for, before the last two fatal
days, barks and shallops were as plentiful as shrimps.”

“I must inquire,” said Aramis, suddenly, and with great agitation. “And
then, if we had a raft constructed--”

“But there are some canoes, my friend; shall I board one?”

“A canoe!--a canoe! Can you think of such a thing, Porthos? A canoe to
be upset in. No, no,” said the bishop of Vannes; “it is not our trade to
ride upon the waves. We will wait, we will wait.”

And Aramis continued walking about with increased agitation. Porthos,
who grew tired of following all the feverish movements of his
friend--Porthos, who in his faith and calmness understood nothing of
the sort of exasperation which was betrayed by his companion’s continual
convulsive starts--Porthos stopped him. “Let us sit down upon this
rock,” said he. “Place yourself there, close to me, Aramis, and I
conjure you, for the last time, to explain to me in a manner I can
comprehend--explain to me what we are doing here.”

“Porthos,” said Aramis, much embarrassed.

“I know that the false king wished to dethrone the true king. That is a
fact, that I understand. Well--”

“Yes?” said Aramis.

“I know that the false king formed the project of selling Belle-Isle to
the English. I understand that, too.”

“Yes?”

“I know that we engineers and captains came and threw ourselves into
Belle-Isle to take direction of the works, and the command of ten
companies levied and paid by M. Fouquet, or rather the ten companies of
his son-in-law. All that is plain.”

Aramis rose in a state of great impatience. He might be said to be a
lion importuned by a gnat. Porthos held him by the arm. “But what I
cannot understand, what, in spite of all the efforts of my mind, and
all my reflections, I cannot comprehend, and never shall comprehend, is,
that instead of sending us troops, instead of sending us reinforcements
of men, munitions, provisions, they leave us without boats, they
leave Belle-Isle without arrivals, without help; it is that instead of
establishing with us a correspondence, whether by signals, or written
or verbal communications, all relations with the shore are intercepted.
Tell me, Aramis, answer me, or rather, before answering me, will you
allow me to tell you what I have thought? Will you hear what my idea is,
the plan I have conceived?”

The bishop raised his head. “Well! Aramis,” continued Porthos, “I have
dreamed, I have imagined that an event has taken place in France. I
dreamt of M. Fouquet all the night, of lifeless fish, of broken eggs,
of chambers badly furnished, meanly kept. Villainous dreams, my dear
D’Herblay; very unlucky, such dreams!”

“Porthos, what is that yonder?” interrupted Aramis, rising suddenly, and
pointing out to his friend a black spot upon the empurpled line of the
water.

“A bark!” said Porthos; “yes, it is a bark! Ah! we shall have some news
at last.”

“There are two!” cried the bishop, on discovering another mast; “two!
three! four!”

“Five!” said Porthos, in his turn. “Six! seven! Ah! _mon Dieu! mon
Dieu!_ it is a fleet!”

“Our boats returning, probably,” said Aramis, very uneasily, in spite of
the assurance he affected.

“They are very large for fishing-boats,” observed Porthos, “and do you
not remark, my friend, that they come from the Loire?”

“They come from the Loire--yes--”

“And look! everybody here sees them as well as ourselves; look, women
and children are beginning to crowd the jetty.”

An old fisherman passed. “Are those our barks, yonder?” asked Aramis.

The old man looked steadily into the eye of the horizon.

“No, monseigneur,” replied he, “they are lighter boars, boats in the
king’s service.”

“Boats in the royal service?” replied Aramis, starting. “How do you know
that?” said he.

“By the flag.”

“But,” said Porthos, “the boat is scarcely visible; how the devil, my
friend, can you distinguish the flag?”

“I see there is one,” replied the old man; “our boats, trade lighters,
do not carry any. That sort of craft is generally used for transport of
troops.”

“Ah!” groaned Aramis.

“_Vivat!_” cried Porthos, “they are sending us reinforcements, don’t you
think they are, Aramis?”

“Probably.”

“Unless it is the English coming.”

“By the Loire? That would have an evil look, Porthos; for they must have
come through Paris!”

“You are right; they are reinforcements, decidedly, or provisions.”

Aramis leaned his head upon his hands, and made no reply. Then, all at
once,--“Porthos,” said he, “have the alarm sounded.”

“The alarm! do you imagine such a thing?”

“Yes, and let the cannoniers mount their batteries, the artillerymen be
at their pieces, and be particularly watchful of the coast batteries.”

Porthos opened his eyes to their widest extent. He looked attentively at
his friend, to convince himself he was in his proper senses.

“_I_ will do it, my dear Porthos,” continued Aramis, in his blandest
tone; “I will go and have these orders executed myself, if you do not
go, my friend.”

“Well! I will--instantly!” said Porthos, who went to execute the orders,
casting all the while looks behind him, to see if the bishop of Vannes
were not deceived; and if, on recovering more rational ideas, he would
not recall him. The alarm was sounded, trumpets brayed, drums rolled;
the great bronze bell swung in horror from its lofty belfry. The dikes
and moles were quickly filled with the curious and soldiers; matches
sparkled in the hands of the artillerymen, placed behind the large
cannon bedded in their stone carriages. When every man was at his post,
when all the preparations for defense were made: “Permit me, Aramis, to
try to comprehend,” whispered Porthos, timidly, in Aramis’s ear.

“My dear friend, you will comprehend but too soon,” murmured M.
d’Herblay, in reply to this question of his lieutenant.

“The fleet which is coming yonder, with sails unfurled, straight towards
the port of Belle-Isle, is a royal fleet, is it not?”

“But as there are two kings in France, Porthos, to which of these two
kings does this fleet belong?”

“Oh! you open my eyes,” replied the giant, stunned by the insinuation.

And Porthos, whose eyes this reply of his friend’s had at last opened,
or rather thickened the bandage which covered his sight, went with his
best speed to the batteries to overlook his people, and exhort every
one to do his duty. In the meantime, Aramis, with his eye fixed on the
horizon, saw the ships continually drawing nearer. The people and the
soldiers, perched on the summits of the rocks, could distinguish the
masts, then the lower sails, and at last the hulls of the lighters,
bearing at the masthead the royal flag of France. It was night when
one of these vessels, which had created such a sensation among the
inhabitants of Belle-Isle, dropped anchor within cannon shot of the
place. It was soon seen, notwithstanding the darkness, that some sort
of agitation reigned on board the vessel, from the side of which a skiff
was lowered, of which the three rowers, bending to their oars, took the
direction of the port, and in a few instants struck land at the foot
of the fort. The commander jumped ashore. He had a letter in his hand,
which he waved in the air, and seemed to wish to communicate with
somebody. This man was soon recognized by several soldiers as one of
the pilots of the island. He was the captain of one of the two barks
retained by Aramis, but which Porthos, in his anxiety with regard to
the fate of the fishermen who had disappeared, had sent in search of the
missing boats. He asked to be conducted to M. d’Herblay. Two soldiers,
at a signal from a sergeant, marched him between them, and escorted him.
Aramis was upon the quay. The envoy presented himself before the
bishop of Vannes. The darkness was almost absolute, notwithstanding the
flambeaux borne at a small distance by the soldiers who were following
Aramis in his rounds.

“Well, Jonathan, from whom do you come?”

“Monseigneur, from those who captured me.”

“Who captured you?”

“You know, monseigneur, we set out in search of our comrades?”

“Yes; and afterwards?”

“Well! monseigneur, within a short league we were captured by a _chasse
maree_ belonging to the king.”

“Ah!” said Aramis.

“Of which king?” cried Porthos.

Jonathan started.

“Speak!” continued the bishop.

“We were captured, monseigneur, and joined to those who had been taken
yesterday morning.”

“What was the cause of the mania for capturing you all?” said Porthos.

“Monsieur, to prevent us from telling you,” replied Jonathan.

Porthos was again at a loss to comprehend. “And they have released you
to-day?” asked he.

“That I might tell you they have captured us, monsieur.”

“Trouble upon trouble,” thought honest Porthos.

During this time Aramis was reflecting.

“Humph!” said he, “then I suppose it is a royal fleet blockading the
coasts?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“Who commands it?”

“The captain of the king’s musketeers.”

“D’Artagnan?”

“D’Artagnan!” exclaimed Porthos.

“I believe that is the name.”

“And did he give you this letter?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“Bring the torches nearer.”

“It is his writing,” said Porthos.

Aramis eagerly read the following lines:

“Order of the king to take Belle-Isle; or to put the garrison to the
sword, if they resist; order to make prisoners of all the men of the
garrison; signed, D’ARTAGNAN, who, the day before yesterday, arrested M.
Fouquet, for the purpose of his being sent to the Bastile.”

Aramis turned pale, and crushed the paper in his hands.

“What is it?” asked Porthos.

“Nothing, my friend, nothing.”

“Tell me, Jonathan?”

“Monseigneur?”

“Did you speak to M. d’Artagnan?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“What did he say to you?”

“That for ampler information, he would speak with monseigneur.”

“Where?”

“On board his own vessel.”

“On board his vessel!” and Porthos repeated, “On board his vessel!”

“M. le mousquetaire,” continued Jonathan, “told me to take you both on
board my canoe, and bring you to him.”

“Let us go at once,” exclaimed Porthos. “Dear D’Artagnan!”

But Aramis stopped him. “Are you mad?” cried he. “Who knows that it is
not a snare?”

“Of the other king’s?” said Porthos, mysteriously.

“A snare, in fact! That’s what it is, my friend.”

“Very possibly; what is to be done, then? If D’Artagnan sends for us--”

“Who assures you that D’Artagnan sends for us?”

“Well, but--but his writing--”

“Writing is easily counterfeited. This looks counterfeited--unsteady--”

“You are always right; but, in the meantime, we know nothing.”

Aramis was silent.

“It is true,” said the good Porthos, “we do not want to know anything.”

“What shall I do?” asked Jonathan.

“You will return on board this captain’s vessel.”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“And will tell him that we beg he will himself come into the island.”

“Ah! I comprehend!” said Porthos.

“Yes, monseigneur,” replied Jonathan; “but if the captain should refuse
to come to Belle-Isle?”

“If he refuses, as we have cannon, we will make use of them.”

“What! against D’Artagnan?”

“If it is D’Artagnan, Porthos, he will come. Go, Jonathan, go!”

“_Ma foi!_ I no longer comprehend anything,” murmured Porthos.

“I will make you comprehend it all, my dear friend; the time for it has
come; sit down upon this gun-carriage, open your ears, and listen well
to me.”

“Oh! _pardieu!_ I will listen, no fear of that.”

“May I depart, monseigneur?” cried Jonathan.

“Yes, begone, and bring back an answer. Allow the canoe to pass, you men
there!” And the canoe pushed off to regain the fleet.

Aramis took Porthos by the hand, and commenced his explanations.



CHAPTER XLIII.
Explanations by Aramis.

“What I have to say to you, friend Porthos, will probably surprise you,
but it may prove instructive.”

“I like to be surprised,” said Porthos, in a kindly tone; “do not spare
me, therefore, I beg. I am hardened against emotions; don’t fear, speak
out.”

“It is difficult, Porthos--difficult; for, in truth, I warn you a second
time, I have very strange things, very extraordinary things, to tell
you.”

“Oh! you speak so well, my friend, that I could listen to you for days
together. Speak, then, I beg--and--stop, I have an idea: I will, to make
your task more easy, I will, to assist you in telling me such things,
question you.”

“I shall be pleased at your doing so.”

“What are we going to fight for, Aramis?”

“If you ask me many such questions as that--if you would render my task
the easier by interrupting my revelations thus, Porthos, you will not
help me at all. So far, on the contrary, that is the very Gordian knot.
But, my friend, with a man like you, good, generous, and devoted, the
confession must be bravely made. I have deceived you, my worthy friend.”

“You have deceived me!”

“Good Heavens! yes.”

“Was it for my good, Aramis?”

“I thought so, Porthos; I thought so sincerely, my friend.”

“Then,” said the honest seigneur of Bracieux, “you have rendered me a
service, and I thank you for it; for if you had not deceived me, I might
have deceived myself. In what, then, have you deceived me, tell me?”

“In that I was serving the usurper against whom Louis XIV., at this
moment, is directing his efforts.”

“The usurper!” said Porthos, scratching his head. “That is--well, I do
not quite clearly comprehend!”

“He is one of the two kings who are contending for the crown of France.”

“Very well! Then you were serving him who is not Louis XIV.?”

“You have hit the matter in one word.”

“It follows that--”

“It follows that we are rebels, my poor friend.”

“The devil! the devil!” cried Porthos, much disappointed.

“Oh! but, dear Porthos, be calm, we shall still find means of getting
out of the affair, trust me.”

“It is not that which makes me uneasy,” replied Porthos; “that which
alone touches me is that ugly word _rebels_.”

“Ah! but--”

“And so, according to this, the duchy that was promised me--”

“It was the usurper that was to give it to you.”

“And that is not the same thing, Aramis,” said Porthos, majestically.

“My friend, if it had only depended upon me, you should have become a
prince.”

Porthos began to bite his nails in a melancholy way.

“That is where you have been wrong,” continued he, “in deceiving me; for
that promised duchy I reckoned upon. Oh! I reckoned upon it seriously,
knowing you to be a man of your word, Aramis.”

“Poor Porthos! pardon me, I implore you!”

“So, then,” continued Porthos, without replying to the bishop’s prayer,
“so then, it seems, I have quite fallen out with Louis XIV.?”

“Oh! I will settle all that, my good friend, I will settle all that. I
will take it on myself alone!”

“Aramis!”

“No, no, Porthos, I conjure you, let me act. No false generosity! No
inopportune devotedness! You knew nothing of my projects. You have done
nothing of yourself. With me it is different. I alone am the author of
this plot. I stood in need of my inseparable companion; I called upon
you, and you came to me in remembrance of our ancient device, ‘All for
one, one for all.’ My crime is that I was an egotist.”

“Now, that is a word I like,” said Porthos; “and seeing that you have
acted entirely for yourself, it is impossible for me to blame you. It is
natural.”

And upon this sublime reflection, Porthos pressed his friend’s hand
cordially.

In presence of this ingenuous greatness of soul, Aramis felt his own
littleness. It was the second time he had been compelled to bend before
real superiority of heart, which is more imposing than brilliancy of
mind. He replied by a mute and energetic pressure to the endearment of
his friend.

“Now,” said Porthos, “that we have come to an explanation, now that I am
perfectly aware of our situation with respect to Louis XIV., I think, my
friend, it is time to make me comprehend the political intrigue of which
we are the victims--for I plainly see there is a political intrigue at
the bottom of all this.”

“D’Artagnan, my good Porthos, D’Artagnan is coming, and will detail it
to you in all its circumstances; but, excuse me, I am deeply grieved, I
am bowed down with mental anguish, and I have need of all my presence
of mind, all my powers of reflection, to extricate you from the false
position in which I have so imprudently involved you; but nothing can be
more clear, nothing more plain, than your position, henceforth. The king
Louis XIV. has no longer now but one enemy: that enemy is myself,
myself alone. I have made you a prisoner, you have followed me, to-day
I liberate you, you fly back to your prince. You can perceive, Porthos,
there is not one difficulty in all this.”

“Do you think so?” said Porthos.

“I am quite sure of it.”

“Then why,” said the admirable good sense of Porthos, “then why, if
we are in such an easy position, why, my friend, do we prepare cannon,
muskets, and engines of all sorts? It seems to me it would be much
more simple to say to Captain d’Artagnan: ‘My dear friend, we have been
mistaken; that error is to be repaired; open the door to us, let us pass
through, and we will say good-bye.’”

“Ah! that!” said Aramis, shaking his head.

“Why do you say ‘that’? Do you not approve of my plan, my friend?”

“I see a difficulty in it.”

“What is it?”

“The hypothesis that D’Artagnan may come with orders which will oblige
us to defend ourselves.”

“What! defend ourselves against D’Artagnan? Folly! Against the good
D’Artagnan!”

Aramis once more replied by shaking his head.

“Porthos,” at length said he, “if I have had the matches lighted and
the guns pointed, if I have had the signal of alarm sounded, if I have
called every man to his post upon the ramparts, those good ramparts of
Belle-Isle which you have so well fortified, it was not for nothing.
Wait to judge; or rather, no, do not wait--”

“What can I do?”

“If I knew, my friend, I would have told you.”

“But there is one thing much more simple than defending ourselves:--a
boat, and away for France--where--”

“My dear friend,” said Aramis, smiling with a strong shade of sadness,
“do not let us reason like children; let us be men in council and in
execution.--But, hark! I hear a hail for landing at the port. Attention,
Porthos, serious attention!”

“It is D’Artagnan, no doubt,” said Porthos, in a voice of thunder,
approaching the parapet.

“Yes, it is I,” replied the captain of the musketeers, running lightly
up the steps of the mole, and gaining rapidly the little esplanade on
which his two friends waited for him. As soon as he came towards them,
Porthos and Aramis observed an officer who followed D’Artagnan, treading
apparently in his very steps. The captain stopped upon the stairs of the
mole, when half-way up. His companions imitated him.

“Make your men draw back,” cried D’Artagnan to Porthos and Aramis; “let
them retire out of hearing.” This order, given by Porthos, was executed
immediately. Then D’Artagnan, turning towards him who followed him:

“Monsieur,” said he, “we are no longer on board the king’s fleet, where,
in virtue of your order, you spoke so arrogantly to me, just now.”

“Monsieur,” replied the officer, “I did not speak arrogantly to you; I
simply, but rigorously, obeyed instructions. I was commanded to follow
you. I follow you. I am directed not to allow you to communicate with
any one without taking cognizance of what you do; I am in duty bound,
accordingly, to overhear your conversations.”

D’Artagnan trembled with rage, and Porthos and Aramis, who heard this
dialogue, trembled likewise, but with uneasiness and fear. D’Artagnan,
biting his mustache with that vivacity which denoted in him
exasperation, closely to be followed by an explosion, approached the
officer.

“Monsieur,” said he, in a low voice, so much the more impressive, that,
affecting calm, it threatened tempest--“monsieur, when I sent a canoe
hither, you wished to know what I wrote to the defenders of Belle-Isle.
You produced an order to that effect; and, in my turn, I instantly
showed you the note I had written. When the skipper of the boat sent by
me returned, when I received the reply of these two gentlemen” (and
he pointed to Aramis and Porthos), “you heard every word of what the
messenger said. All that was plainly in your orders, all that was well
executed, very punctually, was it not?”

“Yes, monsieur,” stammered the officer; “yes, without doubt, but--”

“Monsieur,” continued D’Artagnan, growing warm--“monsieur, when I
manifested the intention of quitting my vessel to cross to Belle-Isle,
you demanded to accompany me; I did not hesitate; I brought you with me.
You are now at Belle-Isle, are you not?”

“Yes, monsieur; but--”

“But--the question no longer is of M. Colbert, who has given you that
order, or of whomsoever in the world you are following the instructions;
the question now is of a man who is a clog upon M. d’Artagnan, and who
is alone with M. d’Artagnan upon steps whose feet are bathed by thirty
feet of salt water; a bad position for that man, a bad position,
monsieur! I warn you.”

“But, monsieur, if I am a restraint upon you,” said the officer,
timidly, and almost faintly, “it is my duty which--”

“Monsieur, you have had the misfortune, either you or those that sent
you, to insult me. It is done. I cannot seek redress from those who
employ you,--they are unknown to me, or are at too great a distance. But
you are under my hand, and I swear that if you make one step behind me
when I raise my feet to go up to those gentlemen, I swear to you by my
name, I will cleave your head in two with my sword, and pitch you into
the water. Oh! it will happen! it will happen! I have only been six
times angry in my life, monsieur, and all five preceding times _I killed
my man_.”

The officer did not stir; he became pale under this terrible threat, but
replied with simplicity, “Monsieur, you are wrong in acting against my
orders.”

Porthos and Aramis, mute and trembling at the top of the parapet, cried
to the musketeer, “Good D’Artagnan, take care!”

D’Artagnan made them a sign to keep silence, raised his foot with
ominous calmness to mount the stair, and turned round, sword in hand,
to see if the officer followed him. The officer made a sign of the cross
and stepped up. Porthos and Aramis, who knew their D’Artagnan, uttered
a cry, and rushed down to prevent the blow they thought they already
heard. But D’Artagnan passed his sword into his left hand,--

“Monsieur,” said he to the officer, in an agitated voice, “you are a
brave man. You will all the better comprehend what I am going to say to
you now.”

“Speak, Monsieur d’Artagnan, speak,” replied the officer.

“These gentlemen we have just seen, and against whom you have orders,
are my friends.”

“I know they are, monsieur.”

“You can understand whether or not I ought to act towards them as your
instructions prescribe.”

“I understand your reserve.”

“Very well; permit me, then, to converse with them without a witness.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan, if I yield to your request, if I do that which
you beg me, I break my word; but if I do not do it, I disoblige you. I
prefer the one dilemma to the other. Converse with your friends, and do
not despise me, monsieur, for doing this for _your_ sake, whom I esteem
and honor; do not despise me for committing for you, and you alone, an
unworthy act.” D’Artagnan, much agitated, threw his arm round the
neck of the young man, and then went up to his friends. The officer,
enveloped in his cloak, sat down on the damp, weed-covered steps.

“Well!” said D’Artagnan to his friends, “such is my position, judge for
yourselves.” All three embraced as in the glorious days of their youth.

“What is the meaning of all these preparations?” said Porthos.

“You ought to have a suspicion of what they signify,” said D’Artagnan.

“Not any, I assure you, my dear captain; for, in fact, I have done
nothing, no more has Aramis,” the worthy baron hastened to say.

D’Artagnan darted a reproachful look at the prelate, which penetrated
that hardened heart.

“Dear Porthos!” cried the bishop of Vannes.

“You see what is being done against you,” said D’Artagnan; “interception
of all boats coming to or going from Belle-Isle. Your means of transport
seized. If you had endeavored to fly, you would have fallen into the
hands of the cruisers that plow the sea in all directions, on the
watch for you. The king wants you to be taken, and he will take you.”
 D’Artagnan tore at his gray mustache. Aramis grew somber, Porthos angry.

“My idea was this,” continued D’Artagnan: “to make you both come on
board, to keep you near me, and restore you your liberty. But now, who
can say, when I return to my ship, I may not find a superior; that I may
not find secret orders which will take from me my command, and give it
to another, who will dispose of me and you without hope of help?”

“We must remain at Belle-Isle,” said Aramis, resolutely; “and I assure
you, for my part, I will not surrender easily.” Porthos said nothing.
D’Artagnan remarked the silence of his friend.

“I have another trial to make of this officer, of this brave fellow who
accompanies me, and whose courageous resistance makes me very happy;
for it denotes an honest man, who, though an enemy, is a thousand times
better than a complaisant coward. Let us try to learn from him what his
instructions are, and what his orders permit or forbid.”

“Let us try,” said Aramis.

D’Artagnan went to the parapet, leaned over towards the steps of the
mole, and called the officer, who immediately came up. “Monsieur,”
 said D’Artagnan, after having exchanged the cordial courtesies natural
between gentlemen who know and appreciate each other, “monsieur, if I
wished to take away these gentlemen from here, what would you do?”

“I should not oppose it, monsieur; but having direct explicit orders to
put them under guard, I should detain them.”

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan.

“That’s all over,” said Aramis, gloomily. Porthos did not stir.

“But still take Porthos,” said the bishop of Vannes. “He can prove to
the king, and I will help him do so, and you too, Monsieur d’Artagnan,
that he had nothing to do with this affair.”

“Hum!” said D’Artagnan. “Will you come? Will you follow me, Porthos? The
king is merciful.”

“I want time for reflection,” said Porthos.

“You will remain here, then?”

“Until fresh orders,” said Aramis, with vivacity.

“Until we have an idea,” resumed D’Artagnan; “and I now believe that
will not be long, for I have one already.”

“Let us say adieu, then,” said Aramis; “but in truth, my good Porthos,
you ought to go.”

“No,” said the latter, laconically.

“As you please,” replied Aramis, a little wounded in his
susceptibilities at the morose tone of his companion. “Only I am
reassured by the promise of an idea from D’Artagnan, an idea I fancy I
have divined.”

“Let us see,” said the musketeer, placing his ear near Aramis’s mouth.
The latter spoke several words rapidly, to which D’Artagnan replied,
“That is it, precisely.”

“Infallible!” cried Aramis.

“During the first emotion this resolution will cause, take care of
yourself, Aramis.”

“Oh! don’t be afraid.”

“Now, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan to the officer, “thanks, a thousand
thanks! You have made yourself three friends for life.”

“Yes,” added Aramis. Porthos alone said nothing, but merely bowed.

D’Artagnan, having tenderly embraced his two old friends, left
Belle-Isle with the inseparable companion with whom M. Colbert had
saddled him. Thus, with the exception of the explanation with which the
worthy Porthos had been willing to be satisfied, nothing had changed in
appearance in the fate of one or the other, “Only,” said Aramis, “there
is D’Artagnan’s idea.”

D’Artagnan did not return on board without profoundly analyzing the idea
he had discovered. Now, we know that whatever D’Artagnan did examine,
according to custom, daylight was certain to illuminate. As to the
officer, now grown mute again, he had full time for meditation.
Therefore, on putting his foot on board his vessel, moored within
cannon-shot of the island, the captain of the musketeers had already got
together all his means, offensive and defensive.

He immediately assembled his council, which consisted of the officers
serving under his orders. These were eight in number; a chief of the
maritime forces; a major directing the artillery; an engineer, the
officer we are acquainted with, and four lieutenants. Having assembled
them, D’Artagnan arose, took of his hat, and addressed them thus:

“Gentlemen, I have been to reconnoiter Belle-Ile-en-Mer, and I have
found in it a good and solid garrison; moreover, preparations are made
for a defense that may prove troublesome. I therefore intend to send for
two of the principal officers of the place, that we may converse with
them. Having separated them from their troops and cannon, we shall be
better able to deal with them; particularly by reasoning with them. Is
not this your opinion, gentlemen?”

The major of artillery rose.

“Monsieur,” said he, with respect, but firmness, “I have heard you say
that the place is preparing to make a troublesome defense. The place is
then, as you know, determined on rebellion?”

D’Artagnan was visibly put out by this reply; but he was not the man to
allow himself to be subdued by a trifle, and resumed:

“Monsieur,” said he, “your reply is just. But you are ignorant that
Belle-Isle is a fief of M. Fouquet’s, and that former monarchs gave the
right to the seigneurs of Belle-Isle to arm their people.” The major
made a movement. “Oh! do not interrupt me,” continued D’Artagnan. “You
are going to tell me that that right to arm themselves against the
English was not a right to arm themselves against their king. But it is
not M. Fouquet, I suppose, who holds Belle-Isle at this moment, since
I arrested M. Fouquet the day before yesterday. Now the inhabitants and
defenders of Belle-Isle know nothing of this arrest. You would announce
it to them in vain. It is a thing so unheard-of and extraordinary, so
unexpected, that they would not believe you. A Breton serves his master,
and not his masters; he serves his master till he has seen him dead. Now
the Bretons, as far as I know, have not seen the body of M. Fouquet. It
is not, then, surprising they hold out against that which is neither M.
Fouquet nor his signature.”

The major bowed in token of assent.

“That is why,” continued D’Artagnan, “I propose to cause two of the
principal officers of the garrison to come on board my vessel. They will
see you, gentlemen; they will see the forces we have at our disposal;
they will consequently know to what they have to trust, and the fate
that attends them, in case of rebellion. We will affirm to them, upon
our honor, that M. Fouquet is a prisoner, and that all resistance can
only be prejudicial to them. We will tell them that at the first cannon
fired, there will be no further hope of mercy from the king. Then, or so
at least I trust, they will resist no longer. They will yield up without
fighting, and we shall have a place given up to us in a friendly way
which it might cost prodigious efforts to subdue.”

The officer who had followed D’Artagnan to Belle-Isle was preparing to
speak, but D’Artagnan interrupted him.

“Yes, I know what you are going to tell me, monsieur; I know that there
is an order of the king’s to prevent all secret communications with
the defenders of Belle-Isle, and that is exactly why I do not offer to
communicate except in presence of my staff.”

And D’Artagnan made an inclination of the head to his officers, who knew
him well enough to attach a certain value to the condescension.

The officers looked at each other as if to read each other’s opinions in
their eyes, with the intention of evidently acting, should they agree,
according to the desire of D’Artagnan. And already the latter saw with
joy that the result of their consent would be sending a bark to Porthos
and Aramis, when the king’s officer drew from a pocket a folded paper,
which he placed in the hands of D’Artagnan.

This paper bore upon its superscription the number 1.

“What, more!” murmured the surprised captain.

“Read, monsieur,” said the officer, with a courtesy that was not free
from sadness.

D’Artagnan, full of mistrust, unfolded the paper, and read these words:
“Prohibition to M. d’Artagnan to assemble any council whatever, or to
deliberate in any way before Belle-Isle be surrendered and the prisoners
shot. Signed--LOUIS.”

D’Artagnan repressed the quiver of impatience that ran through his whole
body, and with a gracious smile:

“That is well, monsieur,” said he; “the king’s orders shall be complied
with.”



CHAPTER XLIV.
Result of the Ideas of the King, and the Ideas of
D’Artagnan.

The blow was direct. It was severe, mortal. D’Artagnan, furious at
having been anticipated by an idea of the king’s, did not despair,
however, even yet; and reflecting upon the idea he had brought back from
Belle-Isle, he elicited therefrom novel means of safety for his friends.

“Gentlemen,” said he, suddenly, “since the king has charged some other
than myself with his secret orders, it must be because I no longer
possess his confidence, and I should really be unworthy of it if I had
the courage to hold a command subject to so many injurious suspicions.
Therefore I will go immediately and carry my resignation to the king.
I tender it before you all, enjoining you all to fall back with me upon
the coast of France, in such a way as not to compromise the safety of
the forces his majesty has confided to me. For this purpose, return all
to your posts; within an hour, we shall have the ebb of the tide. To
your posts, gentlemen! I suppose,” added he, on seeing that all prepared
to obey him, except the surveillant officer, “you have no orders to
object, this time?”

And D’Artagnan almost triumphed while speaking these words. This plan
would prove the safety of his friends. The blockade once raised, they
might embark immediately, and set sail for England or Spain, without
fear of being molested. Whilst they were making their escape, D’Artagnan
would return to the king; would justify his return by the indignation
which the mistrust of Colbert had raised in him; he would be sent back
with full powers, and he would take Belle-Isle; that is to say, the
cage, after the birds had flown. But to this plan the officer opposed a
further order of the king’s. It was thus conceived:

“From the moment M. d’Artagnan shall have manifested the desire of
giving in his resignation, he shall no longer be reckoned leader of the
expedition, and every officer placed under his orders shall be held to
no longer obey him. Moreover, the said Monsieur d’Artagnan, having lost
that quality of leader of the army sent against Belle-Isle, shall set
out immediately for France, accompanied by the officer who will have
remitted the message to him, and who will consider him a prisoner for
whom he is answerable.”

Brave and careless as he was, D’Artagnan turned pale. Everything had
been calculated with a depth of precognition which, for the first time
in thirty years, recalled to him the solid foresight and inflexible
logic of the great cardinal. He leaned his head on his hand, thoughtful,
scarcely breathing. “If I were to put this order in my pocket,” thought
he, “who would know it, what would prevent my doing it? Before the king
had had time to be informed, I should have saved those poor fellows
yonder. Let us exercise some small audacity! My head is not one of those
the executioner strikes off for disobedience. We will disobey!” But at
the moment he was about to adopt this plan, he saw the officers around
him reading similar orders, which the passive agent of the thoughts of
that infernal Colbert had distributed to them. This contingency of his
disobedience had been foreseen--as all the rest had been.

“Monsieur,” said the officer, coming up to him, “I await your good
pleasure to depart.”

“I am ready, monsieur,” replied D’Artagnan, grinding his teeth.

The officer immediately ordered a canoe to receive M. d’Artagnan and
himself. At sight of this he became almost distraught with rage.

“How,” stammered he, “will you carry on the directions of the different
corps?”

“When you are gone, monsieur,” replied the commander of the fleet, “it
is to me the command of the whole is committed.”

“Then, monsieur,” rejoined Colbert’s man, addressing the new leader, “it
is for you that this last order remitted to me is intended. Let us see
your powers.”

“Here they are,” said the officer, exhibiting the royal signature.

“Here are your instructions,” replied the officer, placing the folded
paper in his hands; and turning round towards D’Artagnan, “Come,
monsieur,” said he, in an agitated voice (such despair did he behold in
that man of iron), “do me the favor to depart at once.”

“Immediately!” articulated D’Artagnan, feebly, subdued, crushed by
implacable impossibility.

And he painfully subsided into the little boat, which started, favored
by wind and tide, for the coast of France. The king’s guards embarked
with him. The musketeer still preserved the hope of reaching Nantes
quickly, and of pleading the cause of his friends eloquently enough
to incline the king to mercy. The bark flew like a swallow. D’Artagnan
distinctly saw the land of France profiled in black against the white
clouds of night.

“Ah! monsieur,” said he, in a low voice, to the officer to whom, for
an hour, he had ceased speaking, “what would I give to know the
instructions for the new commander! They are all pacific, are they not?
and--”

He did not finish; the thunder of a distant cannon rolled athwart the
waves, another, and two or three still louder. D’Artagnan shuddered.

“They have commenced the siege of Belle-Isle,” replied the officer. The
canoe had just touched the soil of France.



CHAPTER XLV.
The Ancestors of Porthos.

When D’Artagnan left Aramis and Porthos, the latter returned to the
principal fort, in order to converse with greater liberty. Porthos,
still thoughtful, was a restraint on Aramis, whose mind had never felt
itself more free.

“Dear Porthos,” said he, suddenly, “I will explain D’Artagnan’s idea to
you.”

“What idea, Aramis?”

“An idea to which we shall owe our liberty within twelve hours.”

“Ah! indeed!” said Porthos, much astonished. “Let us hear it.”

“Did you remark, in the scene our friend had with the officer, that
certain orders constrained him with regard to us?”

“Yes, I did notice that.”

“Well! D’Artagnan is going to give in his resignation to the king, and
during the confusion that will result from his absence, we will get
away, or rather you will get away, Porthos, if there is possibility of
flight for only one.”

Here Porthos shook his head and replied: “We will escape together,
Aramis, or we will stay together.”

“Thine is a right, a generous heart,” said Aramis, “only your melancholy
uneasiness affects me.”

“I am not uneasy,” said Porthos.

“Then you are angry with me.”

“I am not angry with you.”

“Then why, my friend, do you put on such a dismal countenance?”

“I will tell you; I am making my will.” And while saying these words,
the good Porthos looked sadly in the face of Aramis.

“Your will!” cried the bishop. “What, then! do you think yourself lost?”

“I feel fatigued. It is the first time, and there is a custom in our
family.”

“What is it, my friend?”

“My grandfather was a man twice as strong as I am.”

“Indeed!” said Aramis; “then your grandfather must have been Samson
himself.”

“No; his name was Antoine. Well! he was about my age, when, setting
out one day for the chase, he felt his legs weak, the man who had never
known what weakness was before.”

“What was the meaning of that fatigue, my friend?”

“Nothing good, as you will see; for having set out, complaining still of
weakness of the legs, he met a wild boar, which made head against him;
he missed him with his arquebuse, and was ripped up by the beast and
died immediately.”

“There is no reason in that why you should alarm yourself, dear
Porthos.”

“Oh! you will see. My father was as strong again as I am. He was a rough
soldier, under Henry III. and Henry IV.; his name was not Antoine, but
Gaspard, the same as M. de Coligny. Always on horseback, he had never
known what lassitude was. One evening, as he rose from table, his legs
failed him.”

“He had supped heartily, perhaps,” said Aramis, “and that was why he
staggered.”

“Bah! A friend of M. de Bassompierre, nonsense! No, no, he was
astonished at this lassitude, and said to my mother, who laughed at him,
‘Would not one believe I was going to meet with a wild boar, as the late
M. du Vallon, my father did?’”

“Well?” said Aramis.

“Well, having this weakness, my father insisted upon going down into the
garden, instead of going to bed; his foot slipped on the first stair,
the staircase was steep; my father fell against a stone in which an iron
hinge was fixed. The hinge gashed his temple; and he was stretched out
dead upon the spot.”

Aramis raised his eyes to his friend: “These are two extraordinary
circumstances,” said he; “let us not infer that there may succeed a
third. It is not becoming in a man of your strength to be superstitious,
my brave Porthos. Besides, when were your legs known to fail? Never have
you stood so firm, so haughtily; why, you could carry a house on your
shoulders.”

“At this moment,” said Porthos, “I feel myself pretty active; but at
times I vacillate; I sink; and lately this phenomenon, as you say, has
occurred four times. I will not say this frightens me, but it annoys me.
Life is an agreeable thing. I have money; I have fine estates; I have
horses that I love; I have also friends that I love: D’Artagnan, Athos,
Raoul, and you.”

The admirable Porthos did not even take the trouble to dissimulate in
the very presence of Aramis the rank he gave him in his friendship.
Aramis pressed his hand: “We will still live many years,” said he, “to
preserve to the world such specimens of its rarest men. Trust yourself
to me, my friend; we have no reply from D’Artagnan, that is a good sign.
He must have given orders to get the vessels together and clear the
seas. On my part I have just issued directions that a bark should be
rolled on rollers to the mouth of the great cavern of Locmaria, which
you know, where we have so often lain in wait for the foxes.”

“Yes, and which terminates at the little creek by a trench where we
discovered the day that splendid fox escaped that way.”

“Precisely. In case of misfortunes, a bark is to be concealed for us in
that cavern; indeed, it must be there by this time. We will wait for a
favorable moment, and during the night we will go to sea!”

“That is a grand idea. What shall we gain by it?”

“We shall gain this--nobody knows that grotto, or rather its issue,
except ourselves and two or three hunters of the island; we shall gain
this--that if the island is occupied, the scouts, seeing no bark upon
the shore, will never imagine we can escape, and will cease to watch.”

“I understand.”

“Well! that weakness in the legs?”

“Oh! better, much, just now.”

“You see, then, plainly, that everything conspires to give us quietude
and hope. D’Artagnan will sweep the sea and leave us free. No royal
fleet or descent to be dreaded. _Vive Dieu!_ Porthos, we have still
half a century of magnificent adventure before us, and if I once touch
Spanish ground, I swear to you,” added the bishop with terrible energy,
“that your brevet of duke is not such a chance as it is said to be.”

“We live by hope,” said Porthos, enlivened by the warmth of his
companion.

All at once a cry resounded in their ears: “To arms! to arms!”

This cry, repeated by a hundred throats, piercing the chamber where the
two friends were conversing, carried surprise to one, and uneasiness to
the other. Aramis opened the window; he saw a crowd of people running
with flambeaux. Women were seeking places of safety, the armed
population were hastening to their posts.

“The fleet! the fleet!” cried a soldier, who recognized Aramis.

“The fleet?” repeated the latter.

“Within half cannon-shot,” continued the soldier.

“To arms!” cried Aramis.

“To arms!” repeated Porthos, formidably. And both rushed forth towards
the mole to place themselves within the shelter of the batteries. Boats,
laden with soldiers, were seen approaching; and in three directions, for
the purpose of landing at three points at once.

“What must be done?” said an officer of the guard.

“Stop them; and if they persist, fire!” said Aramis.

Five minutes later, the cannonade commenced. These were the shots that
D’Artagnan had heard as he landed in France. But the boats were too
near the mole to allow the cannon to aim correctly. They landed, and the
combat commenced hand to hand.

“What’s the matter, Porthos?” said Aramis to his friend.

“Nothing! nothing!--only my legs; it is really incomprehensible!--they
will be better when we charge.” In fact, Porthos and Aramis did
charge with such vigor, and so thoroughly animated their men, that the
royalists re-embarked precipitately, without gaining anything but the
wounds they carried away.

“Eh! but Porthos,” cried Aramis, “we must have a prisoner, quick!
quick!” Porthos bent over the stair of the mole, and seized by the nape
of the neck one of the officers of the royal army who was waiting to
embark till all his people should be in the boat. The arm of the giant
lifted up his prey, which served him as a buckler, and he recovered
himself without a shot being fired at him.

“Here is a prisoner for you,” said Porthos coolly to Aramis.

“Well!” cried the latter, laughing, “did you not calumniate your legs?”

“It was not with my legs I captured him,” said Porthos, “it was with my
arms!”



CHAPTER XLVI.
The Son of Biscarrat.

The Bretons of the Isle were very proud of this victory; Aramis did not
encourage them in the feeling.

“What will happen,” said he to Porthos, when everybody was gone home,
“will be that the anger of the king will be roused by the account of the
resistance; and that these brave people will be decimated or shot when
they are taken, which cannot fail to take place.”

“From which it results, then,” said Porthos, “that what we have done is
of not the slightest use.”

“For the moment it may be,” replied the bishop, “for we have a prisoner
from whom we shall learn what our enemies are preparing to do.”

“Yes, let us interrogate the prisoner,” said Porthos, “and the means of
making him speak are very simple. We are going to supper; we will invite
him to join us; as he drinks he will talk.”

This was done. The officer was at first rather uneasy, but became
reassured on seeing what sort of men he had to deal with. He gave,
without having any fear of compromising himself, all the details
imaginable of the resignation and departure of D’Artagnan. He explained
how, after that departure, the new leader of the expedition had ordered
a surprise upon Belle-Isle. There his explanations stopped. Aramis
and Porthos exchanged a glance that evinced their despair. No more
dependence to be placed now on D’Artagnan’s fertile imagination--no
further resource in the event of defeat. Aramis, continuing his
interrogations, asked the prisoner what the leaders of the expedition
contemplated doing with the leaders of Belle-Isle.

“The orders are,” replied he, “to kill _during_ combat, or hang
_afterwards_.”

Porthos and Aramis looked at each other again, and the color mounted to
their faces.

“I am too light for the gallows,” replied Aramis; “people like me are
not hung.”

“And I am too heavy,” said Porthos; “people like me break the cord.”

“I am sure,” said the prisoner, gallantly, “that we could have
guaranteed you the exact kind of death you preferred.”

“A thousand thanks!” said Aramis, seriously. Porthos bowed.

“One more cup of wine to your health,” said he, drinking himself. From
one subject to another the chat with the officer was prolonged. He was
an intelligent gentleman, and suffered himself to be led on by the charm
of Aramis’s wit and Porthos’s cordial _bonhomie_.

“Pardon me,” said he, “if I address a question to you; but men who are
in their sixth bottle have a clear right to forget themselves a little.”

“Address it!” cried Porthos; “address it!”

“Speak,” said Aramis.

“Were you not, gentlemen, both in the musketeers of the late king?”

“Yes, monsieur, and amongst the best of them, if you please,” said
Porthos.

“That is true; I should say even the best of all soldiers, messieurs, if
I did not fear to offend the memory of my father.”

“Of your father?” cried Aramis.

“Do you know what my name is?”

“_Ma foi!_ no, monsieur; but you can tell us, and--”

“I am called Georges de Biscarrat.”

“Oh!” cried Porthos, in his turn. “Biscarrat! Do you remember that name,
Aramis?”

“Biscarrat!” reflected the bishop. “It seems to me--”

“Try to recollect, monsieur,” said the officer.

“_Pardieu!_ that won’t take me long,” said Porthos. “Biscarrat--called
Cardinal--one of the four who interrupted us on the day on which we
formed our friendship with D’Artagnan, sword in hand.”

“Precisely, gentlemen.”

“The only one,” cried Aramis, eagerly, “we could not scratch.”

“Consequently, a capital blade?” said the prisoner.

“That’s true! most true!” exclaimed both friends together. “_Ma foi!_
Monsieur Biscarrat, we are delighted to make the acquaintance of such a
brave man’s son.”

Biscarrat pressed the hands held out by the two musketeers. Aramis
looked at Porthos as much as to say, “Here is a man who will help us,”
 and without delay,--“Confess, monsieur,” said he, “that it is good to
have once been a good man.”

“My father always said so, monsieur.”

“Confess, likewise, that it is a sad circumstance in which you find
yourself, of falling in with men destined to be shot or hung, and
to learn that these men are old acquaintances, in fact, hereditary
friends.”

“Oh! you are not reserved for such a frightful fate as that, messieurs
and friends!” said the young man, warmly.

“Bah! you said so yourself.”

“I said so just now, when I did not know you; but now that I know you, I
say--you will evade this dismal fate, if you wish!”

“How--if we wish?” echoed Aramis, whose eyes beamed with intelligence as
he looked alternately at the prisoner and Porthos.

“Provided,” continued Porthos, looking, in his turn, with noble
intrepidity, at M. Biscarrat and the bishop--“provided nothing
disgraceful be required of us.”

“Nothing at all will be required of you, gentlemen,” replied the
officer--“what should they ask of you? If they find you they will kill
you, that is a predetermined thing; try, then, gentlemen, to prevent
their finding you.”

“I don’t think I am mistaken,” said Porthos, with dignity; “but it
appears evident to me that if they want to find us, they must come and
seek us here.”

“In that you are perfectly right, my worthy friend,” replied Aramis,
constantly consulting with his looks the countenance of Biscarrat, who
had grown silent and constrained. “You wish, Monsieur de Biscarrat, to
say something to us, to make us some overture, and you dare not--is that
true?”

“Ah! gentlemen and friends! it is because by speaking I betray the
watchword. But, hark! I hear a voice that frees mine by dominating it.”

“Cannon!” said Porthos.

“Cannon and musketry, too!” cried the bishop.

On hearing at a distance, among the rocks, these sinister reports of a
combat which they thought had ceased:

“What can that be?” asked Porthos.

“Eh! _Pardieu!_” cried Aramis; “that is just what I expected.”

“What is that?”

“That the attack made by you was nothing but a feint; is not that true,
monsieur? And whilst your companions allowed themselves to be repulsed,
you were certain of effecting a landing on the other side of the
island.”

“Oh! several, monsieur.”

“We are lost, then,” said the bishop of Vannes, quietly.

“Lost! that is possible,” replied the Seigneur de Pierrefonds, “but we
are not taken or hung.” And so saying, he rose from the table, went to
the wall, and coolly took down his sword and pistols, which he examined
with the care of an old soldier who is preparing for battle, and who
feels that life, in a great measure, depends upon the excellence and
right conditions of his arms.

At the report of the cannon, at the news of the surprise which might
deliver up the island to the royal troops, the terrified crowd rushed
precipitately to the fort to demand assistance and advice from their
leaders. Aramis, pale and downcast, between two flambeaux, showed
himself at the window which looked into the principal court, full of
soldiers waiting for orders and bewildered inhabitants imploring succor.

“My friends,” said D’Herblay, in a grave and sonorous voice, “M.
Fouquet, your protector, your friend, you father, has been arrested by
an order of the king, and thrown into the Bastile.” A sustained yell of
vengeful fury came floating up to the window at which the bishop stood,
and enveloped him in a magnetic field.

“Avenge Monsieur Fouquet!” cried the most excited of his hearers, “death
to the royalists!”

“No, my friends,” replied Aramis, solemnly; “no, my friends; no
resistance. The king is master in his kingdom. The king is the mandatory
of God. The king and God have struck M. Fouquet. Humble yourselves
before the hand of God. Love God and the king, who have struck M.
Fouquet. But do not avenge your seigneur, do not think of avenging him.
You would sacrifice yourselves in vain--you, your wives and children,
your property, your liberty. Lay down your arms, my friends--lay down
your arms! since the king commands you so to do--and retire peaceably to
your dwellings. It is I who ask you to do so; it is I who beg you to do
so; it is I who now, in the hour of need, command you to do so, in the
name of M. Fouquet.”

The crowd collected under the window uttered a prolonged roar of anger
and terror. “The soldiers of Louis XIV. have reached the island,”
 continued Aramis. “From this time it would no longer be a fight betwixt
them and you--it would be a massacre. Begone, then, begone, and forget;
this time I command you, in the name of the Lord of Hosts!”

The mutineers retired slowly, submissive, silent.

“Ah! what have you just been saying, my friend?” said Porthos.

“Monsieur,” said Biscarrat to the bishop, “you may save all these
inhabitants, but thus you will neither save yourself nor your friend.”

“Monsieur de Biscarrat,” said the bishop of Vannes, with a singular
accent of nobility and courtesy, “Monsieur de Biscarrat, be kind enough
to resume your liberty.”

“I am very willing to do so, monsieur; but--”

“That would render us a service, for when announcing to the king’s
lieutenant the submission of the islanders, you will perhaps obtain some
grace for us on informing him of the manner in which that submission has
been effected.”

“Grace!” replied Porthos with flashing eyes, “what is the meaning of
that word?”

Aramis touched the elbow of his friend roughly, as he had been
accustomed to do in the days of their youth, when he wanted to warn
Porthos that he had committed, or was about to commit, a blunder.
Porthos understood him, and was silent immediately.

“I will go, messieurs,” replied Biscarrat, a little surprised likewise
at the word “grace” pronounced by the haughty musketeer, of and to whom,
but a few minutes before, he had related with so much enthusiasm the
heroic exploits with which his father had delighted him.

“Go, then, Monsieur Biscarrat,” said Aramis, bowing to him, “and at
parting receive the expression of our entire gratitude.”

“But you, messieurs, you whom I think it an honor to call my friends,
since you have been willing to accept that title, what will become of
you in the meantime?” replied the officer, very much agitated at taking
leave of the two ancient adversaries of his father.

“We will wait here.”

“But, _mon Dieu!_--the order is precise and formal.”

“I am bishop of Vannes, Monsieur de Biscarrat; and they no more shoot a
bishop than they hang a gentleman.”

“Ah! yes, monsieur--yes, monseigneur,” replied Biscarrat; “it is true,
you are right, there is still that chance for you. Then, I will depart,
I will repair to the commander of the expedition, the king’s lieutenant.
Adieu! then, messieurs, or rather, to meet again, I hope.”

The worthy officer, jumping upon a horse given him by Aramis, departed
in the direction of the sound of cannon, which, by surging the crowd
into the fort, had interrupted the conversation of the two friends with
their prisoner. Aramis watched the departure, and when left alone with
Porthos:

“Well, do you comprehend?” said he.

“_Ma foi!_ no.”

“Did not Biscarrat inconvenience you here?”

“No; he is a brave fellow.”

“Yes; but the grotto of Locmaria--is it necessary all the world should
know it?”

“Ah! that is true, that is true; I comprehend. We are going to escape by
the cavern.”

“If you please,” cried Aramis, gayly. “Forward, friend Porthos; our boat
awaits us. King Louis has not caught us--_yet_.”



CHAPTER XLVII.
The Grotto of Locmaria.

The cavern of Locmaria was sufficiently distant from the mole to render
it necessary for our friends to husband their strength in order to
reach it. Besides, night was advancing; midnight had struck at the fort.
Porthos and Aramis were loaded with money and arms. They walked, then,
across the heath, which stretched between the mole and the cavern,
listening to every noise, in order better to avoid an ambush. From time
to time, on the road which they had carefully left on their left, passed
fugitives coming from the interior, at the news of the landing of the
royal troops. Aramis and Porthos, concealed behind some projecting mass
of rock, collected the words that escaped from the poor people, who
fled, trembling, carrying with them their most valuable effects, and
tried, whilst listening to their complaints, to gather something from
them for their own interest. At length, after a rapid race, frequently
interrupted by prudent stoppages, they reached the deep grottoes, in
which the prophetic bishop of Vannes had taken care to have secreted a
bark capable of keeping the sea at this fine season.

“My good friend,” said Porthos, panting vigorously, “we have arrived, it
seems. But I thought you spoke of three men, three servants, who were to
accompany us. I don’t see them--where are they?”

“Why should you see them, Porthos?” replied Aramis. “They are certainly
waiting for us in the cavern, and, no doubt, are resting, having
accomplished their rough and difficult task.”

Aramis stopped Porthos, who was preparing to enter the cavern. “Will you
allow me, my friend,” said he to the giant, “to pass in first? I know
the signal I have given to these men; who, not hearing it, would be very
likely to fire upon you or slash away with their knives in the dark.”

“Go on, then, Aramis; go on--go first; you impersonate wisdom and
foresight; go. Ah! there is that fatigue again, of which I spoke to you.
It has just seized me afresh.”

Aramis left Porthos sitting at the entrance of the grotto, and bowing
his head, he penetrated into the interior of the cavern, imitating the
cry of the owl. A little plaintive cooing, a scarcely distinct echo,
replied from the depths of the cave. Aramis pursued his way cautiously,
and soon was stopped by the same kind of cry as he had first uttered,
within ten paces of him.

“Are you there, Yves?” said the bishop.

“Yes, monseigneur; Goenne is here likewise. His son accompanies us.”

“That is well. Are all things ready?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“Go to the entrance of the grottoes, my good Yves, and you will there
find the Seigneur de Pierrefonds, who is resting after the fatigue of
our journey. And if he should happen not to be able to walk, lift him
up, and bring him hither to me.”

The three men obeyed. But the recommendation given to his servants was
superfluous. Porthos, refreshed, had already commenced the descent, and
his heavy step resounded amongst the cavities, formed and supported by
columns of porphyry and granite. As soon as the Seigneur de Bracieux had
rejoined the bishop, the Bretons lighted a lantern with which they were
furnished, and Porthos assured his friend that he felt as strong again
as ever.

“Let us inspect the boat,” said Aramis, “and satisfy ourselves at once
what it will hold.”

“Do not go too near with the light,” said the patron Yves; “for as you
desired me, monseigneur, I have placed under the bench of the poop, in
the coffer you know of, the barrel of powder, and the musket-charges
that you sent me from the fort.”

“Very well,” said Aramis; and, taking the lantern himself, he examined
minutely all parts of the canoe, with the precautions of a man who is
neither timid nor ignorant in the face of danger. The canoe was long,
light, drawing little water, thin of keel; in short, one of those that
have always been so aptly built at Belle-Isle; a little high in its
sides, solid upon the water, very manageable, furnished with planks
which, in uncertain weather, formed a sort of deck over which the waves
might glide, so as to protect the rowers. In two well-closed coffers,
placed beneath the benches of the prow and the poop, Aramis found bread,
biscuit, dried fruits, a quarter of bacon, a good provision of water in
leathern bottles; the whole forming rations sufficient for people who
did not mean to quit the coast, and would be able to revictual, if
necessity commanded. The arms, eight muskets, and as many horse-pistols,
were in good condition, and all loaded. There were additional oars, in
case of accident, and that little sail called _trinquet_, which assists
the speed of the canoe at the same time the boatmen row, and is so
useful when the breeze is slack. When Aramis had seen to all these
things, and appeared satisfied with the result of his inspection, “Let
us consult Porthos,” said he, “to know if we must endeavor to get the
boat out by the unknown extremity of the grotto, following the descent
and the shade of the cavern, or whether it be better, in the open air,
to make it slide upon its rollers through the bushes, leveling the road
of the little beach, which is but twenty feet high, and gives, at high
tide, three or four fathoms of good water upon a sound bottom.”

“It must be as you please, monseigneur,” replied the skipper Yves,
respectfully; “but I don’t believe that by the slope of the cavern, and
in the dark in which we shall be obliged to maneuver our boat, the road
will be so convenient as the open air. I know the beach well, and can
certify that it is as smooth as a grass-plot in a garden; the
interior of the grotto, on the contrary, is rough; without reckoning,
monseigneur, that at its extremity we shall come to the trench which
leads into the sea, and perhaps the canoe will not pass down it.”

“I have made my calculation,” said the bishop, “and I am certain it will
pass.”

“So be it; I wish it may, monseigneur,” continued Yves; “but your
highness knows very well that to make it reach the extremity of the
trench, there is an enormous stone to be lifted--that under which the
fox always passes, and which closes the trench like a door.”

“It can be raised,” said Porthos; “that is nothing.”

“Oh! I know that monseigneur has the strength of ten men,” replied Yves;
“but that is giving him a great deal of trouble.”

“I think the skipper may be right,” said Aramis; “let us try the
open-air passage.”

“The more so, monseigneur,” continued the fisherman, “that we should not
be able to embark before day, it will require so much labor, and that
as soon as daylight appears, a good _vedette_ placed outside the grotto
would be necessary, indispensable even, to watch the maneuvers of the
lighters or cruisers that are on the look-out for us.”

“Yes, yes, Yves, your reasons are good; we will go by the beach.”

And the three robust Bretons went to the boat, and were beginning to
place their rollers underneath it to put it in motion, when the distant
barking of dogs was heard, proceeding from the interior of the island.

Aramis darted out of the grotto, followed by Porthos. Dawn just tinted
with purple and white the waves and plain; through the dim light,
melancholy fir-trees waved their tender branches over the pebbles,
and long flights of crows were skimming with their black wings the
shimmering fields of buckwheat. In a quarter of an hour it would be
clear daylight; the wakened birds announced it to all nature. The
barkings which had been heard, which had stopped the three fishermen
engaged in moving the boat, and had brought Aramis and Porthos out of
the cavern, now seemed to come from a deep gorge within about a league
of the grotto.

“It is a pack of hounds,” said Porthos; “the dogs are on a scent.”

“Who can be hunting at such a moment as this?” said Aramis.

“And this way, particularly,” continued Porthos, “where they might
expect the army of the royalists.”

“The noise comes nearer. Yes, you are right, Porthos, the dogs are on a
scent. But, Yves!” cried Aramis, “come here! come here!”

Yves ran towards him, letting fall the cylinder which he was about to
place under the boat when the bishop’s call interrupted him.

“What is the meaning of this hunt, skipper?” said Porthos.

“Eh! monseigneur, I cannot understand it,” replied the Breton. “It is
not at such a moment that the Seigneur de Locmaria would hunt. No, and
yet the dogs--”

“Unless they have escaped from the kennel.”

“No,” said Goenne, “they are not the Seigneur de Locmaria’s hounds.”

“In common prudence,” said Aramis, “let us go back into the grotto; the
voices evidently draw nearer, we shall soon know what we have to trust
to.”

They re-entered, but had scarcely proceeded a hundred steps in the
darkness, when a noise like the hoarse sigh of a creature in distress
resounded through the cavern, and breathless, rapid, terrified, a fox
passed like a flash of lightning before the fugitives, leaped over
the boat and disappeared, leaving behind its sour scent, which was
perceptible for several seconds under the low vaults of the cave.

“The fox!” cried the Bretons, with the glad surprise of born hunters.

“Accursed mischance!” cried the bishop, “our retreat is discovered.”

“How so?” said Porthos; “are you afraid of a fox?”

“Eh! my friend, what do you mean by that? why do you specify the fox? It
is not the fox alone. _Pardieu!_ But don’t you know, Porthos, that after
the foxes come hounds, and after hounds men?”

Porthos hung his head. As though to confirm the words of Aramis, they
heard the yelping pack approach with frightful swiftness upon the trail.
Six foxhounds burst at once upon the little heath, with mingling yelps
of triumph.

“There are the dogs, plain enough!” said Aramis, posted on the look-out
behind a chink in the rocks; “now, who are the huntsmen?”

“If it is the Seigneur de Locmaria’s,” replied the sailor, “he will
leave the dogs to hunt the grotto, for he knows them, and will not enter
in himself, being quite sure that the fox will come out the other side;
it is there he will wait for him.”

“It is not the Seigneur de Locmaria who is hunting,” replied Aramis,
turning pale in spite of his efforts to maintain a placid countenance.

“Who is it, then?” said Porthos.

“Look!”

Porthos applied his eye to the slit, and saw at the summit of a hillock
a dozen horsemen urging on their horses in the track of the dogs,
shouting, “_Taiaut! taiaut!_”

“The guards!” said he.

“Yes, my friend, the king’s guards.”

“The king’s guards! do you say, monseigneur?” cried the Bretons, growing
pale in turn.

“With Biscarrat at their head, mounted upon my gray horse,” continued
Aramis.

The hounds at the same moment rushed into the grotto like an avalanche,
and the depths of the cavern were filled with their deafening cries.

“Ah! the devil!” said Aramis, resuming all his coolness at the sight of
this certain, inevitable danger. “I am perfectly satisfied we are lost,
but we have, at least, one chance left. If the guards who follow their
hounds happen to discover there is an issue to the grotto, there is no
help for us, for on entering they must see both ourselves and our boat.
The dogs must not go out of the cavern. Their masters must not enter.”

“That is clear,” said Porthos.

“You understand,” added Aramis, with the rapid precision of command;
“there are six dogs that will be forced to stop at the great stone under
which the fox has glided--but at the too narrow opening of which they
must be themselves stopped and killed.”

The Bretons sprang forward, knife in hand. In a few minutes there was a
lamentable concert of angry barks and mortal howls--and then, silence.

“That’s well!” said Aramis, coolly, “now for the masters!”

“What is to be done with them?” said Porthos.

“Wait their arrival, conceal ourselves, and kill them.”

“_Kill them!_” replied Porthos.

“There are sixteen,” said Aramis, “at least, at present.”

“And well armed,” added Porthos, with a smile of consolation.

“It will last about ten minutes,” said Aramis. “To work!”

And with a resolute air he took up a musket, and placed a hunting-knife
between his teeth.

“Yves, Goenne, and his son,” continued Aramis, “will pass the muskets to
us. You, Porthos, will fire when they are close. We shall have brought
down, at the lowest computation, eight, before the others are aware of
anything--that is certain; then all, there are five of us, will dispatch
the other eight, knife in hand.”

“And poor Biscarrat?” said Porthos.

Aramis reflected a moment--“Biscarrat first,” replied he, coolly. “He
knows us.”



CHAPTER XLVIII.
The Grotto.

In spite of the sort of divination which was the remarkable side of
the character of Aramis, the event, subject to the risks of things over
which uncertainty presides, did not fall out exactly as the bishop of
Vannes had foreseen. Biscarrat, better mounted than his companions,
arrived first at the opening of the grotto, and comprehended that
fox and hounds were one and all engulfed in it. Only, struck by that
superstitious terror which every dark and subterraneous way naturally
impresses upon the mind of man, he stopped at the outside of the grotto,
and waited till his companions should have assembled round him.

“Well!” asked the young men, coming up, out of breath, and unable to
understand the meaning of this inaction.

“Well! I cannot hear the dogs; they and the fox must all be lost in this
infernal cavern.”

“They were too close up,” said one of the guards, “to have lost scent
all at once. Besides, we should hear them from one side or another. They
must, as Biscarrat says, be in this grotto.”

“But then,” said one of the young men, “why don’t they give tongue?”

“It is strange!” muttered another.

“Well, but,” said a fourth, “let us go into this grotto. Does it happen
to be forbidden we should enter it?”

“No,” replied Biscarrat. “Only, as it looks as dark as a wolf’s mouth,
we might break our necks in it.”

“Witness the dogs,” said a guard, “who seem to have broken theirs.”

“What the devil can have become of them?” asked the young men in chorus.
And every master called his dog by his name, whistled to him in his
favorite mode, without a single one replying to either call or whistle.

“It is perhaps an enchanted grotto,” said Biscarrat; “let us see.” And,
jumping from his horse, he made a step into the grotto.

“Stop! stop! I will accompany you,” said one of the guards, on seeing
Biscarrat disappear in the shades of the cavern’s mouth.

“No,” replied Biscarrat, “there must be something extraordinary in the
place--don’t let us risk ourselves all at once. If in ten minutes you do
not hear of me, you can come in, but not all at once.”

“Be it so,” said the young man, who, besides, did not imagine that
Biscarrat ran much risk in the enterprise, “we will wait for you.” And
without dismounting from their horses, they formed a circle round the
grotto.

Biscarrat entered then alone, and advanced through the darkness till
he came in contact with the muzzle of Porthos’s musket. The resistance
which his chest met with astonished him; he naturally raised his hand
and laid hold of the icy barrel. At the same instant, Yves lifted a
knife against the young man, which was about to fall upon him with
all force of a Breton’s arm, when the iron wrist of Porthos stopped it
half-way. Then, like low muttering thunder, his voice growled in the
darkness, “I will not have him killed!”

Biscarrat found himself between a protection and a threat, the one
almost as terrible as the other. However brave the young man might
be, he could not prevent a cry escaping him, which Aramis immediately
suppressed by placing a handkerchief over his mouth. “Monsieur de
Biscarrat,” said he, in a low voice, “we mean you no harm, and you must
know that if you have recognized us; but, at the first word, the first
groan, the first whisper, we shall be forced to kill you as we have
killed your dogs.”

“Yes, I recognize you, gentlemen,” said the officer, in a low voice.
“But why are you here--what are you doing, here? Unfortunate men! I
thought you were in the fort.”

“And you, monsieur, you were to obtain conditions for us, I think?”

“I did all I was able, messieurs, but--”

“But what?”

“But there are positive orders.”

“To kill us?”

Biscarrat made no reply. It would have cost him too much to speak of the
cord to gentlemen. Aramis understood the silence of the prisoner.

“Monsieur Biscarrat,” said he, “you would be already dead if we had not
regard for your youth and our ancient association with your father; but
you may yet escape from the place by swearing that you will not tell
your companions what you have seen.”

“I will not only swear that I will not speak of it,” said Biscarrat,
“but I still further swear that I will do everything in the world to
prevent my companions from setting foot in the grotto.”

“Biscarrat! Biscarrat!” cried several voices from the outside, coming
like a whirlwind into the cave.

“Reply,” said Aramis.

“Here I am!” cried Biscarrat.

“Now, begone; we depend on your loyalty.” And he left his hold of the
young man, who hastily returned towards the light.

“Biscarrat! Biscarrat!” cried the voices, still nearer. And the shadows
of several human forms projected into the interior of the grotto.
Biscarrat rushed to meet his friends in order to stop them, and met them
just as they were adventuring into the cave. Aramis and Porthos listened
with the intense attention of men whose life depends upon a breath of
air.

“Oh! oh!” exclaimed one of the guards, as he came to the light, “how
pale you are!”

“Pale!” cried another; “you ought to say corpse-color.”

“I!” said the young man, endeavoring to collect his faculties.

“In the name of Heaven! what has happened?” exclaimed all the voices.

“You have not a drop of blood in your veins, my poor friend,” said one
of them, laughing.

“Messieurs, it is serious,” said another, “he is going to faint; does
any one of you happen to have any salts?” And they all laughed.

This hail of jests fell round Biscarrat’s ears like musket-balls in a
_melee_. He recovered himself amidst a deluge of interrogations.

“What do you suppose I have seen?” asked he. “I was too hot when I
entered the grotto, and I have been struck with a chill. That is all.”

“But the dogs, the dogs; have you seen them again--did you see anything
of them--do you know anything about them?”

“I suppose they have got out some other way.”

“Messieurs,” said one of the young men, “there is in that which is going
on, in the paleness and silence of our friend, a mystery which Biscarrat
will not, or cannot reveal. Only, and this is certain, Biscarrat has
seen something in the grotto. Well, for my part, I am very curious to
see what it is, even if it is the devil! To the grotto! messieurs, to
the grotto!”

“To the grotto!” repeated all the voices. And the echo of the cavern
carried like a menace to Porthos and Aramis, “To the grotto! to the
grotto!”

Biscarrat threw himself before his companions. “Messieurs! messieurs!”
 cried he, “in the name of Heaven! do not go in!”

“Why, what is there so terrific in the cavern?” asked several at once.
“Come, speak, Biscarrat.”

“Decidedly, it is the devil he has seen,” repeated he who had before
advanced that hypothesis.

“Well,” said another, “if he has seen him, he need not be selfish; he
may as well let us have a look at him in turn.”

“Messieurs! messieurs! I beseech you,” urged Biscarrat.

“Nonsense! Let us pass!”

“Messieurs, I implore you not to enter!”

“Why, you went in yourself.”

Then one of the officers, who--of a riper age than the others--had till
this time remained behind, and had said nothing, advanced. “Messieurs,”
 said he, with a calmness which contrasted with the animation of the
young men, “there is in there some person, or something, that is not
the devil; but which, whatever it may be, has had sufficient power to
silence our dogs. We must discover who this some one is, or what this
something is.”

Biscarrat made a last effort to stop his friends, but it was useless. In
vain he threw himself before the rashest; in vain he clung to the rocks
to bar the passage; the crowd of young men rushed into the cave, in the
steps of the officer who had spoken last, but who had sprung in first,
sword in hand, to face the unknown danger. Biscarrat, repulsed by
his friends, unable to accompany them, without passing in the eyes
of Porthos and Aramis for a traitor and a perjurer, with painfully
attentive ear and unconsciously supplicating hands leaned against the
rough side of a rock which he thought must be exposed to the fire of the
musketeers. As to the guards, they penetrated further and further,
with exclamations that grew fainter as they advanced. All at once, a
discharge of musketry, growling like thunder, exploded in the entrails
of the vault. Two or three balls were flattened against the rock on
which Biscarrat was leaning. At the same instant, cries, shrieks,
imprecations burst forth, and the little troop of gentlemen
reappeared--some pale, some bleeding--all enveloped in a cloud of
smoke, which the outer air seemed to suck from the depths of the cavern.
“Biscarrat! Biscarrat!” cried the fugitives, “you knew there was an
ambuscade in that cavern, and you did not warn us! Biscarrat, you are
the cause that four of us are murdered men! Woe be to you, Biscarrat!”

“You are the cause of my being wounded unto death,” said one of the
young men, letting a gush of scarlet life-blood vomit in his palm, and
spattering it into Biscarrat’s livid face. “My blood be on your head!”
 And he rolled in agony at the feet of the young man.

“But, at least, tell us who is there?” cried several furious voices.

Biscarrat remained silent. “Tell us, or die!” cried the wounded man,
raising himself upon one knee, and lifting towards his companion an
arm bearing a useless sword. Biscarrat rushed towards him, opening his
breast for the blow, but the wounded man fell back not to rise again,
uttering a groan which was his last. Biscarrat, with hair on end,
haggard eyes, and bewildered head, advanced towards the interior of
the cavern, saying, “You are right. Death to me, who have allowed my
comrades to be assassinated. I am a worthless wretch!” And throwing away
his sword, for he wished to die without defending himself, he rushed
head foremost into the cavern. The others followed him. The eleven
who remained out of sixteen imitated his example; but they did not go
further than the first. A second discharge laid five upon the icy sand;
and as it was impossible to see whence this murderous thunder issued,
the others fell back with a terror that can be better imagined than
described. But, far from flying, as the others had done, Biscarrat
remained safe and sound, seated on a fragment of rock, and waited. There
were only six gentlemen left.

“Seriously,” said one of the survivors, “is it the devil?”

“_Ma foi!_ it is much worse,” said another.

“Ask Biscarrat, he knows.”

“Where is Biscarrat?” The young men looked round them, and saw that
Biscarrat did not answer.

“He is dead!” said two or three voices.

“Oh! no!” replied another, “I saw him through the smoke, sitting quietly
on a rock. He is in the cavern; he is waiting for us.”

“He must know who are there.”

“And how should he know them?”

“He was taken prisoner by the rebels.”

“That is true. Well! let us call him, and learn from him whom we have
to deal with.” And all voices shouted, “Biscarrat! Biscarrat!” But
Biscarrat did not answer.

“Good!” said the officer who had shown so much coolness in the affair.
“We have no longer any need of him; here are reinforcements coming.”

In fact, a company of guards, left in the rear by their officers, whom
the ardor of the chase had carried away--from seventy-five to eighty
men--arrived in good order, led by their captain and the first
lieutenant. The five officers hastened to meet their soldiers; and, in
language the eloquence of which may be easily imagined, they related the
adventure, and asked for aid. The captain interrupted them. “Where are
your companions?” demanded he.

“Dead!”

“But there were sixteen of you!”

“Ten are dead. Biscarrat is in the cavern, and we are five.”

“Biscarrat is a prisoner?”

“Probably.”

“No, for here he is--look.” In fact, Biscarrat appeared at the opening
of the grotto.

“He is making a sign to come on,” said the officer. “Come on!”

“Come on!” cried all the troop. And they advanced to meet Biscarrat.

“Monsieur,” said the captain, addressing Biscarrat, “I am assured that
you know who the men are in that grotto, and who make such a desperate
defense. In the king’s name I command you to declare what you know.”

“Captain,” said Biscarrat, “you have no need to command me. My word has
been restored to me this very instant; and I came in the name of these
men.”

“To tell me who they are?”

“To tell you they are determined to defend themselves to the death,
unless you grant them satisfactory terms.”

“How many are there of them, then?”

“There are two,” said Biscarrat.

“There are two--and want to impose conditions upon us?”

“There are two, and they have already killed ten of our men.”

“What sort of people are they--giants?”

“Worse than that. Do you remember the history of the Bastion
Saint-Gervais, captain?”

“Yes; where four musketeers held out against an army.”

“Well, these are two of those same musketeers.”

“And their names?”

“At that period they were called Porthos and Aramis. Now they are styled
M. d’Herblay and M. du Vallon.”

“And what interest have they in all this?”

“It is they who were holding Bell-Isle for M. Fouquet.”

A murmur ran through the ranks of the soldiers on hearing the two words
“Porthos and Aramis.” “The musketeers! the musketeers!” repeated they.
And among all these brave men, the idea that they were going to have a
struggle against two of the oldest glories of the French army, made a
shiver, half enthusiasm, two-thirds terror, run through them. In fact,
those four names--D’Artagnan, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis--were venerated
among all who wore a sword; as, in antiquity, the names of Hercules,
Theseus, Castor, and Pollux were venerated.

“Two men--and they have killed ten in two discharges! It is impossible,
Monsieur Biscarrat!”

“Eh! captain,” replied the latter, “I do not tell you that they have
not with them two or three men, as the musketeers of the Bastion
Saint-Gervais had two or three lackeys; but, believe me, captain, I
have seen these men, I have been taken prisoner by them--I know they
themselves alone are all-sufficient to destroy an army.”

“That we shall see,” said the captain, “and that in a moment, too.
Gentlemen, attention!”

At this reply, no one stirred, and all prepared to obey. Biscarrat alone
risked a last attempt.

“Monsieur,” said he, in a low voice, “be persuaded by me; let us pass
on our way. Those two men, those two lions you are going to attack, will
defend themselves to the death. They have already killed ten of our men;
they will kill double the number, and end by killing themselves rather
than surrender. What shall we gain by fighting them?”

“We shall gain the consciousness, monsieur, of not having allowed eighty
of the king’s guards to retire before two rebels. If I listened to
your advice, monsieur, I should be a dishonored man; and by dishonoring
myself I should dishonor the army. Forward, my men!”

And he marched first as far as the opening of the grotto. There he
halted. The object of this halt was to give Biscarrat and his companions
time to describe to him the interior of the grotto. Then, when he
believed he had a sufficient acquaintance with the place, he divided his
company into three bodies, which were to enter successively, keeping up
a sustained fire in all directions. No doubt, in this attack they would
lose five more, perhaps ten; but, certainly, they must end by taking the
rebels, since there was no issue; and, at any rate, two men could not
kill eighty.

“Captain,” said Biscarrat, “I beg to be allowed to march at the head of
the first platoon.”

“So be it,” replied the captain; “you have all the honor. I make you a
present of it.”

“Thanks!” replied the young man, with all the firmness of his race.

“Take your sword, then.”

“I shall go as I am, captain,” said Biscarrat, “for I do not go to kill,
I go to be killed.”

And placing himself at the head of the first platoon, with head
uncovered and arms crossed,--“March, gentlemen,” said he.



CHAPTER XLIX.
An Homeric Song.

It is time to pass to the other camp, and to describe at once the
combatants and the field of battle. Aramis and Porthos had gone to the
grotto of Locmaria with the expectation of finding there their canoe
ready armed, as well as the three Bretons, their assistants; and they
at first hoped to make the bark pass through the little issue of the
cavern, concealing in that fashion both their labors and their flight.
The arrival of the fox and dogs obliged them to remain concealed. The
grotto extended the space of about a hundred _toises_, to that little
slope dominating a creek. Formerly a temple of the Celtic divinities,
when Belle-Isle was still called Kalonese, this grotto had beheld more
than one human sacrifice accomplished in its mystic depths. The first
entrance to the cavern was by a moderate descent, above which distorted
rocks formed a weird arcade; the interior, very uneven and dangerous
from the inequalities of the vault, was subdivided into several
compartments, which communicated with each other by means of rough and
jagged steps, fixed right and left, in uncouth natural pillars. At the
third compartment the vault was so low, the passage so narrow, that the
bark would scarcely have passed without touching the side; nevertheless,
in moments of despair, wood softens and stone grows flexible beneath the
human will. Such was the thought of Aramis, when, after having fought
the fight, he decided upon flight--a flight most dangerous, since all
the assailants were not dead; and that, admitting the possibility of
putting the bark to sea, they would have to fly in open day, before the
conquered, so interested on recognizing their small number, in pursuing
their conquerors. When the two discharges had killed ten men, Aramis,
familiar with the windings of the cavern, went to reconnoiter them one
by one, and counted them, for the smoke prevented seeing outside; and
he immediately commanded that the canoe should be rolled as far as the
great stone, the closure of the liberating issue. Porthos collected all
his strength, took the canoe in his arms, and raised it up, whilst the
Bretons made it run rapidly along the rollers. They had descended into
the third compartment; they had arrived at the stone which walled the
outlet. Porthos seized this gigantic stone at its base, applied his
robust shoulder, and gave a heave which made the wall crack. A cloud of
dust fell from the vault, with the ashes of ten thousand generations of
sea birds, whose nests stuck like cement to the rock. At the third shock
the stone gave way, and oscillated for a minute. Porthos, placing his
back against the neighboring rock, made an arch with his foot, which
drove the block out of the calcareous masses which served for hinges and
cramps. The stone fell, and daylight was visible, brilliant, radiant,
flooding the cavern through the opening, and the blue sea appeared to
the delighted Bretons. They began to lift the bark over the barricade.
Twenty more _toises_, and it would glide into the ocean. It was during
this time that the company arrived, was drawn up by the captain, and
disposed for either an escalade or an assault. Aramis watched
over everything, to favor the labors of his friends. He saw the
reinforcements, counted the men, and convinced himself at a single
glance of the insurmountable peril to which fresh combat would expose
them. To escape by sea, at the moment the cavern was about to be
invaded, was impossible. In fact, the daylight which had just been
admitted to the last compartments had exposed to the soldiers the bark
being rolled towards the sea, the two rebels within musket-shot; and
one of their discharges would riddle the boat if it did not kill the
navigators. Besides, allowing everything,--if the bark escaped with the
men on board of it, how could the alarm be suppressed--how could notice
to the royal lighters be prevented? What could hinder the poor canoe,
followed by sea and watched from the shore, from succumbing before the
end of the day? Aramis, digging his hands into his gray hair with rage,
invoked the assistance of God and the assistance of the demons. Calling
to Porthos, who was doing more work than all the rollers--whether of
flesh or wood--“My friend,” said he, “our adversaries have just received
a reinforcement.”

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, quietly, “what is to be done, then?”

“To recommence the combat,” said Aramis, “is hazardous.”

“Yes,” said Porthos, “for it is difficult to suppose that out of two,
one should not be killed; and certainly, if one of us was killed, the
other would get himself killed also.” Porthos spoke these words with
that heroic nature which, with him, grew grander with necessity.

Aramis felt it like a spur to his heart. “We shall neither of us be
killed if you do what I tell you, friend Porthos.”

“Tell me what?”

“These people are coming down into the grotto.”

“Yes.”

“We could kill about fifteen of them, but no more.”

“How many are there in all?” asked Porthos.

“They have received a reinforcement of seventy-five men.”

“Seventy-five and five, eighty. Ah!” sighed Porthos.

“If they fire all at once they will riddle us with balls.”

“Certainly they will.”

“Without reckoning,” added Aramis, “that the detonation might occasion a
collapse of the cavern.”

“Ay,” said Porthos, “a piece of falling rock just now grazed my
shoulder.”

“You see, then?”

“Oh! it is nothing.”

“We must determine upon something quickly. Our Bretons are going to
continue to roll the canoe towards the sea.”

“Very well.”

“We two will keep the powder, the balls, and the muskets here.”

“But only two, my dear Aramis--we shall never fire three shots
together,” said Porthos, innocently, “the defense by musketry is a bad
one.”

“Find a better, then.”

“I have found one,” said the giant, eagerly; “I will place myself
in ambuscade behind the pillar with this iron bar, and invisible,
unattackable, if they come in floods, I can let my bar fall upon their
skulls, thirty times in a minute. _Hein!_ what do you think of the
project? You smile!”

“Excellent, dear friend, perfect! I approve it greatly; only you will
frighten them, and half of them will remain outside to take us by
famine. What we want, my good friend, is the entire destruction of the
troop. A single survivor encompasses our ruin.”

“You are right, my friend, but how can we attract them, pray?”

“By not stirring, my good Porthos.”

“Well! we won’t stir, then; but when they are all together--”

“Then leave it to me, I have an idea.”

“If it is so, and your idea proves a good one--and your idea is most
likely to be good--I am satisfied.”

“To your ambuscade, Porthos, and count how many enter.”

“But you, what will you do?”

“Don’t trouble yourself about me; I have a task to perform.”

“I think I hear shouts.”

“It is they! To your post. Keep within reach of my voice and hand.”

Porthos took refuge in the second compartment, which was in darkness,
absolutely black. Aramis glided into the third; the giant held in his
hand an iron bar of about fifty pounds weight. Porthos handled this
lever, which had been used in rolling the bark, with marvelous facility.
During this time, the Bretons had pushed the bark to the beach. In the
further and lighter compartment, Aramis, stooping and concealed, was
busy with some mysterious maneuver. A command was given in a loud voice.
It was the last order of the captain commandant. Twenty-five men jumped
from the upper rocks into the first compartment of the grotto, and
having taken their ground, began to fire. The echoes shrieked and
barked, the hissing balls seemed actually to rarefy the air, and then
opaque smoke filled the vault.

“To the left! to the left!” cried Biscarrat, who, in his first assault,
had seen the passage to the second chamber, and who, animated by the
smell of powder, wished to guide his soldiers in that direction. The
troop, accordingly, precipitated themselves to the left--the passage
gradually growing narrower. Biscarrat, with his hands stretched forward,
devoted to death, marched in advance of the muskets. “Come on! come on!”
 exclaimed he, “I see daylight!”

“Strike, Porthos!” cried the sepulchral voice of Aramis.

Porthos breathed a heavy sigh--but he obeyed. The iron bar fell full and
direct upon the head of Biscarrat, who was dead before he had ended his
cry. Then the formidable lever rose ten times in ten seconds, and
made ten corpses. The soldiers could see nothing; they heard sighs and
groans; they stumbled over dead bodies, but as they had no conception
of the cause of all this, they came forward jostling each other. The
implacable bar, still falling, annihilated the first platoon, without
a single sound to warn the second, which was quietly advancing; only,
commanded by the captain, the men had stripped a fir, growing on the
shore, and, with its resinous branches twisted together, the captain had
made a flambeau. On arriving at the compartment where Porthos, like the
exterminating angel, had destroyed all he touched, the first rank drew
back in terror. No firing had replied to that of the guards, and yet
their way was stopped by a heap of dead bodies--they literally walked in
blood. Porthos was still behind his pillar. The captain, illumining with
trembling pine-torch this frightful carnage, of which he in vain
sought the cause, drew back towards the pillar behind which Porthos was
concealed. Then a gigantic hand issued from the shade, and fastened
on the throat of the captain, who uttered a stifle rattle; his
stretched-out arms beating the air, the torch fell and was extinguished
in blood. A second after, the corpse of the captain dropped close to
the extinguished torch, and added another body to the heap of dead which
blocked up the passage. All this was effected as mysteriously as though
by magic. At hearing the rattling in the throat of the captain, the
soldiers who accompanied him had turned round, caught a glimpse of his
extended arms, his eyes starting from their sockets, and then the torch
fell and they were left in darkness. From an unreflective, instinctive,
mechanical feeling, the lieutenant cried:

“Fire!”

Immediately a volley of musketry flamed, thundered, roared in the
cavern, bringing down enormous fragments from the vaults. The cavern was
lighted for an instant by this discharge, and then immediately returned
to pitchy darkness rendered thicker by the smoke. To this succeeded a
profound silence, broken only by the steps of the third brigade, now
entering the cavern.



CHAPTER L.
The Death of a Titan.

At the moment when Porthos, more accustomed to the darkness than these
men, coming from open daylight, was looking round him to see if through
this artificial midnight Aramis were not making him some signal, he felt
his arm gently touched, and a voice low as a breath murmured in his ear,
“Come.”

“Oh!” said Porthos.

“Hush!” said Aramis, if possible, yet more softly.

And amidst the noise of the third brigade, which continued to advance,
the imprecations of the guards still left alive, the muffled groans of
the dying, Aramis and Porthos glided unseen along the granite walls of
the cavern. Aramis led Porthos into the last but one compartment, and
showed him, in a hollow of the rocky wall, a barrel of powder weighing
from seventy to eighty pounds, to which he had just attached a fuse. “My
friend,” said he to Porthos, “you will take this barrel, the match of
which I am going to set fire to, and throw it amidst our enemies; can
you do so?”

“_Parbleu!_” replied Porthos; and he lifted the barrel with one hand.
“Light it!”

“Stop,” said Aramis, “till they are all massed together, and then, my
Jupiter, hurl your thunderbolt among them.”

“Light it,” repeated Porthos.

“On my part,” continued Aramis, “I will join our Bretons, and help them
to get the canoe to the sea. I will wait for you on the shore; launch it
strongly, and hasten to us.”

“Light it,” said Porthos, a third time.

“But do you understand me?”

“_Parbleu!_” said Porthos again, with laughter that he did not even
attempt to restrain, “when a thing is explained to me I understand it;
begone, and give me the light.”

Aramis gave the burning match to Porthos, who held out his arm to him,
his hands being engaged. Aramis pressed the arm of Porthos with both his
hands, and fell back to the outlet of the cavern where the three rowers
awaited him.

Porthos, left alone, applied the spark bravely to the match. The
spark--a feeble spark, first principle of conflagration--shone in the
darkness like a glow-worm, then was deadened against the match which it
set fire to, Porthos enlivening the flame with his breath. The smoke
was a little dispersed, and by the light of the sparkling match objects
might, for two seconds, be distinguished. It was a brief but splendid
spectacle, that of this giant, pale, bloody, his countenance lighted by
the fire of the match burning in surrounding darkness! The soldiers saw
him, they saw the barrel he held in his hand--they at once understood
what was going to happen. Then, these men, already choked with horror at
the sight of what had been accomplished, filled with terror at thought
of what was about to be accomplished, gave out a simultaneous shriek of
agony. Some endeavored to fly, but they encountered the third brigade,
which barred their passage; others mechanically took aim and attempted
to fire their discharged muskets; others fell instinctively upon their
knees. Two or three officers cried out to Porthos to promise him his
liberty if he would spare their lives. The lieutenant of the third
brigade commanded his men to fire; but the guards had before them their
terrified companions, who served as a living rampart for Porthos. We
have said that the light produced by the spark and the match did not
last more than two seconds; but during these two seconds this is what
it illumined: in the first place, the giant, enlarged in the darkness;
then, at ten paces off, a heap of bleeding bodies, crushed, mutilated,
in the midst of which some still heaved in the last agony, lifting the
mass as a last respiration inflating the sides of some old monster dying
in the night. Every breath of Porthos, thus vivifying the match, sent
towards this heap of bodies a phosphorescent aura, mingled with streaks
of purple. In addition to this principal group scattered about the
grotto, as the chances of death or surprise had stretched them, isolated
bodies seemed to be making ghastly exhibitions of their gaping wounds.
Above ground, bedded in pools of blood, rose, heavy and sparkling, the
short, thick pillars of the cavern, of which the strongly marked shades
threw out the luminous particles. And all this was seen by the tremulous
light of a match attached to a barrel of powder, that is to say, a torch
which, whilst throwing a light on the dead past, showed death to come.

As I have said, this spectacle did not last above two seconds. During
this short space of time an officer of the third brigade got together
eight men armed with muskets, and, through an opening, ordered them to
fire upon Porthos. But they who received the order to fire trembled so
that three guards fell by the discharge, and the five remaining balls
hissed on to splinter the vault, plow the ground, or indent the pillars
of the cavern.

A burst of laughter replied to this volley; then the arm of the giant
swung round; then was seen whirling through the air, like a falling
star, the train of fire. The barrel, hurled a distance of thirty
feet, cleared the barricade of dead bodies, and fell amidst a group of
shrieking soldiers, who threw themselves on their faces. The officer had
followed the brilliant train in the air; he endeavored to precipitate
himself upon the barrel and tear out the match before it reached the
powder it contained. Useless! The air had made the flame attached to the
conductor more active; the match, which at rest might have burnt five
minutes, was consumed in thirty seconds, and the infernal work exploded.
Furious vortices of sulphur and nitre, devouring shoals of fire which
caught every object, the terrible thunder of the explosion, this is what
the second which followed disclosed in that cavern of horrors. The rocks
split like planks of deal beneath the axe. A jet of fire, smoke, and
_debris_ sprang from the middle of the grotto, enlarging as it mounted.
The large walls of silex tottered and fell upon the sand, and the sand
itself, an instrument of pain when launched from its hard bed, riddled
the faces with its myriad cutting atoms. Shrieks, imprecations, human
life, dead bodies--all were engulfed in one terrific crash.

The three first compartments became one sepulchral sink into which fell
grimly back, in the order of their weight, every vegetable, mineral,
or human fragment. Then the lighter sand and ash came down in turn,
stretching like a winding sheet and smoking over the dismal scene. And
now, in this burning tomb, this subterranean volcano, seek the king’s
guards with their blue coats laced with silver. Seek the officers,
brilliant in gold, seek for the arms upon which they depended for their
defense. One single man has made of all of those things a chaos more
confused, more shapeless, more terrible than the chaos which existed
before the creation of the world. There remained nothing of the three
compartments--nothing by which God could have recognized His handiwork.
As for Porthos, after having hurled the barrel of powder amidst his
enemies, he had fled, as Aramis had directed him to do, and had gained
the last compartment, into which air, light, and sunshine penetrated
through the opening. Scarcely had he turned the angle which separated
the third compartment from the fourth when he perceived at a hundred
paces from him the bark dancing on the waves. There were his friends,
there liberty, there life and victory. Six more of his formidable
strides, and he would be out of the vault; out of the vault! a dozen of
his vigorous leaps and he would reach the canoe. Suddenly he felt his
knees give way; his knees seemed powerless, his legs to yield beneath
him.

“Oh! oh!” murmured he, “there is my weakness seizing me again! I can
walk no further! What is this?”

Aramis perceived him through the opening, and unable to conceive what
could induce him to stop thus--“Come on, Porthos! come on,” he cried;
“come quickly!”

“Oh!” replied the giant, making an effort that contorted every muscle of
his body--“oh! but I cannot.” While saying these words, he fell upon
his knees, but with his mighty hands he clung to the rocks, and raised
himself up again.

“Quick! quick!” repeated Aramis, bending forward towards the shore, as
if to draw Porthos towards him with his arms.

“Here I am,” stammered Porthos, collecting all his strength to make one
step more.

“In the name of Heaven! Porthos, make haste! the barrel will blow up!”

“Make haste, monseigneur!” shouted the Bretons to Porthos, who was
floundering as in a dream.

But there was no time; the explosion thundered, earth gaped, the smoke
which hurled through the clefts obscured the sky; the sea flowed back as
though driven by the blast of flame which darted from the grotto as if
from the jaws of some gigantic fiery chimera; the reflux took the
bark out twenty _toises_; the solid rocks cracked to their base, and
separated like blocks beneath the operation of the wedge; a portion
of the vault was carried up towards heaven, as if it had been built of
cardboard; the green and blue and topaz conflagration and black lava of
liquefactions clashed and combated an instant beneath a majestic dome
of smoke; then oscillated, declined, and fell successively the mighty
monoliths of rock which the violence of the explosion had not been able
to uproot from the bed of ages; they bowed to each other like grave and
stiff old men, then prostrating themselves, lay down forever in their
dusty tomb.

This frightful shock seemed to restore Porthos the strength that he had
lost; he arose, a giant among granite giants. But at the moment he was
flying between the double hedge of granite phantoms, these latter, which
were no longer supported by the corresponding links, began to roll and
totter round our Titan, who looked as if precipitated from heaven amidst
rocks which he had just been launching. Porthos felt the very earth
beneath his feet becoming jelly-tremulous. He stretched both hands to
repulse the falling rocks. A gigantic block was held back by each of his
extended arms. He bent his head, and a third granite mass sank between
his shoulders. For an instant the power of Porthos seemed about to fail
him, but this new Hercules united all his force, and the two walls of
the prison in which he was buried fell back slowly and gave him place.
For an instant he appeared, in this frame of granite, like the angel
of chaos, but in pushing back the lateral rocks, he lost his point of
support, for the monolith which weighed upon his shoulders, and the
boulder, pressing upon him with all its weight, brought the giant down
upon his knees. The lateral rocks, for an instant pushed back, drew
together again, and added their weight to the ponderous mass which would
have been sufficient to crush ten men. The hero fell without a groan--he
fell while answering Aramis with words of encouragement and hope, for,
thanks to the powerful arch of his hands, for an instant he believed
that, like Enceladus, he would succeed in shaking off the triple load.
But by degrees Aramis beheld the block sink; the hands, strung for an
instant, the arms stiffened for a last effort, gave way, the extended
shoulders sank, wounded and torn, and the rocks continued to gradually
collapse.

“Porthos! Porthos!” cried Aramis, tearing his hair. “Porthos! where are
you? Speak!”

“Here, here,” murmured Porthos, with a voice growing evidently weaker,
“patience! patience!”

Scarcely had he pronounced these words, when the impulse of the fall
augmented the weight; the enormous rock sank down, pressed by those
others which sank in from the sides, and, as it were, swallowed up
Porthos in a sepulcher of badly jointed stones. On hearing the dying
voice of his friend, Aramis had sprung to land. Two of the Bretons
followed him, with each a lever in his hand--one being sufficient to
take care of the bark. The dying rattle of the valiant gladiator guided
them amidst the ruins. Aramis, animated, active and young as at twenty,
sprang towards the triple mass, and with his hands, delicate as those of
a woman, raised by a miracle of strength the corner-stone of this great
granite grave. Then he caught a glimpse, through the darkness of that
charnel-house, of the still brilliant eye of his friend, to whom the
momentary lifting of the mass restored a momentary respiration. The
two men came rushing up, grasped their iron levers, united their triple
strength, not merely to raise it, but sustain it. All was useless. They
gave way with cries of grief, and the rough voice of Porthos, seeing
them exhaust themselves in a useless struggle, murmured in an almost
cheerful tone those supreme words which came to his lips with the last
respiration, “Too heavy!”

After which his eyes darkened and closed, his face grew ashy pale, the
hands whitened, and the colossus sank quite down, breathing his last
sigh. With him sank the rock, which, even in his dying agony he had
still held up. The three men dropped the levers, which rolled upon the
tumulary stone. Then, breathless, pale, his brow covered with sweat,
Aramis listened, his breast oppressed, his heart ready to break.

Nothing more. The giant slept the eternal sleep, in the sepulcher which
God had built about him to his measure.



CHAPTER LI.
Porthos’s Epitaph.

Aramis, silent and sad as ice, trembling like a timid child, arose
shivering from the stone. A Christian does not walk on tombs. But,
though capable of standing, he was not capable of walking. It might
be said that something of dead Porthos had just died within him. His
Bretons surrounded him; Aramis yielded to their kind exertions, and the
three sailors, lifting him up, carried him to the canoe. Then, having
laid him down upon the bench near the rudder, they took to their oars,
preferring this to hoisting sail, which might betray them.

On all that leveled surface of the ancient grotto of Locmaria, one
single hillock attracted their eyes. Aramis never removed his from it;
and, at a distance out in the sea, in proportion as the shore receded,
that menacing proud mass of rock seemed to draw itself up, as formerly
Porthos used to draw himself up, raising a smiling, yet invincible head
towards heaven, like that of his dear old honest valiant friend, the
strongest of the four, yet the first dead. Strange destiny of these men
of brass! The most simple of heart allied to the most crafty; strength
of body guided by subtlety of mind; and in the decisive moment, when
vigor alone could save mind and body, a stone, a rock, a vile material
weight, triumphed over manly strength, and falling upon the body, drove
out the mind.

Worthy Porthos! born to help other men, always ready to sacrifice
himself for the safety of the weak, as if God had only given him
strength for that purpose; when dying he only thought he was carrying
out the conditions of his compact with Aramis, a compact, however, which
Aramis alone had drawn up, and which Porthos had only known to suffer
by its terrible solidarity. Noble Porthos! of what good now are thy
chateaux overflowing with sumptuous furniture, forests overflowing with
game, lakes overflowing with fish, cellars overflowing with wealth! Of
what service to thee now thy lackeys in brilliant liveries, and in the
midst of them Mousqueton, proud of the power delegated by thee! Oh,
noble Porthos! careful heaper-up of treasure, was it worth while to
labor to sweeten and gild life, to come upon a desert shore, surrounded
by the cries of seagulls, and lay thyself, with broken bones, beneath
a torpid stone? Was it worth while, in short, noble Porthos, to heap so
much gold, and not have even the distich of a poor poet engraven upon
thy monument? Valiant Porthos! he still, without doubt, sleeps, lost,
forgotten, beneath the rock the shepherds of the heath take for the
gigantic abode of a _dolmen_. And so many twining branches, so many
mosses, bent by the bitter wind of ocean, so many lichens solder thy
sepulcher to earth, that no passers-by will imagine such a block of
granite could ever have been supported by the shoulders of one man.

Aramis, still pale, still icy-cold, his heart upon his lips, looked,
even till, with the last ray of daylight, the shore faded on the
horizon. Not a word escaped him, not a sigh rose from his deep breast.
The superstitious Bretons looked upon him, trembling. Such silence was
not that of a man, it was the silence of a statue. In the meantime, with
the first gray lines that lighted up the heavens, the canoe hoisted its
little sail, which, swelling with the kisses of the breeze, and carrying
them rapidly from the coast, made bravest way towards Spain, across the
dreaded Gulf of Gascony, so rife with storms. But scarcely half an hour
after the sail had been hoisted, the rowers became inactive, reclining
on their benches, and, making an eye-shade with their hands, pointed out
to each other a white spot which appeared on the horizon as motionless
as a gull rocked by the viewless respiration of the waves. But that
which might have appeared motionless to ordinary eyes was moving at a
quick rate to the experienced eye of the sailor; that which appeared
stationary upon the ocean was cutting a rapid way through it. For some
time, seeing the profound torpor in which their master was plunged,
they did not dare to rouse him, and satisfied themselves with exchanging
their conjectures in whispers. Aramis, in fact, so vigilant, so
active--Aramis, whose eye, like that of the lynx, watched without
ceasing, and saw better by night than by day--Aramis seemed to sleep
in this despair of soul. An hour passed thus, during which daylight
gradually disappeared, but during which also the sail in view gained so
swiftly on the bark, that Goenne, one of the three sailors, ventured to
say aloud:

“Monseigneur, we are being chased!”

Aramis made no reply; the ship still gained upon them. Then, of their
own accord, two of the sailors, by the direction of the patron Yves,
lowered the sail, in order that that single point upon the surface of
the waters should cease to be a guide to the eye of the enemy pursuing
them. On the part of the ship in sight, on the contrary, two more small
sails were run up at the extremities of the masts. Unfortunately, it was
the time of the finest and longest days of the year, and the moon, in
all her brilliancy, succeeded inauspicious daylight. The _balancelle_,
which was pursuing the little bark before the wind, had then still half
an hour of twilight, and a whole night almost as light as day.

“Monseigneur! monseigneur! we are lost!” said the captain. “Look! they
see us plainly, though we have lowered sail.”

“That is not to be wondered at,” murmured one of the sailors, “since
they say that, by the aid of the devil, the Paris-folk have fabricated
instruments with which they see as well at a distance as near, by night
as well as by day.”

Aramis took a telescope from the bottom of the boat, focussed it
silently, and passing it to the sailor, “Here,” said he, “look!” The
sailor hesitated.

“Don’t be alarmed,” said the bishop, “there is no sin in it; and if
there is any sin, I will take it on myself.”

The sailor lifted the glass to his eye, and uttered a cry. He believed
that the vessel, which appeared to be distant about cannon-shot, had
at a single bound cleared the whole distance. But, on withdrawing
the instrument from his eye, he saw that, except the way which the
_balancelle_ had been able to make during that brief instant, it was
still at the same distance.

“So,” murmured the sailor, “they can see us as we see them.”

“They see us,” said Aramis, and sank again into impassibility.

“What!--they see us!” said Yves. “Impossible!”

“Well, captain, look yourself,” said the sailor. And he passed him the
glass.

“Monseigneur assures me that the devil has nothing to do with this?”
 asked Yves.

Aramis shrugged his shoulders.

The skipper lifted the glass to his eye. “Oh! monseigneur,” said he, “it
is a miracle--there they are; it seems as if I were going to touch them.
Twenty-five men at least! Ah! I see the captain forward. He holds a
glass like this, and is looking at us. Ah! he turns round, and gives
an order; they are rolling a piece of cannon forward--they are loading
it--pointing it. _Misericorde!_ they are firing at us!”

And by a mechanical movement, the skipper put aside the telescope, and
the pursuing ship, relegated to the horizon, appeared again in its true
aspect. The vessel was still at the distance of nearly a league, but the
maneuver sighted thus was not less real. A light cloud of smoke appeared
beneath the sails, more blue than they, and spreading like a flower
opening; then, at about a mile from the little canoe, they saw the ball
take the crown off two or three waves, dig a white furrow in the sea,
and disappear at the end of it, as inoffensive as the stone with which,
in play, a boy makes ducks and drakes. It was at once a menace and a
warning.

“What is to be done?” asked the patron.

“They will sink us!” said Goenne, “give us absolution, monseigneur!” And
the sailors fell on their knees before him.

“You forget that they can see you,” said he.

“That is true!” said the sailors, ashamed of their weakness. “Give us
your orders, monseigneur, we are prepared to die for you.”

“Let us wait,” said Aramis.

“How--let us wait?”

“Yes; do you not see, as you just now said, that if we endeavor to fly,
they will sink us?”

“But, perhaps,” the patron ventured to say, “perhaps under cover of
night, we could escape them.”

“Oh!” said Aramis, “they have, no doubt, Greek fire with which to
lighten their own course and ours likewise.”

At the same moment, as if the vessel was responsive to the appeal of
Aramis, a second cloud of smoke mounted slowly to the heavens, and from
the bosom of that cloud sparkled an arrow of flame, which described a
parabola like a rainbow, and fell into the sea, where it continued to
burn, illuminating a space of a quarter of a league in diameter.

The Bretons looked at each other in terror. “You see plainly,” said
Aramis, “it will be better to wait for them.”

The oars dropped from the hands of the sailors, and the bark, ceasing
to make way, rocked motionless upon the summits of the waves. Night came
on, but still the ship drew nearer. It might be imagined it redoubled
its speed with darkness. From time to time, as a vulture rears its head
out of its nest, the formidable Greek fire darted from its sides, and
cast its flame upon the ocean like an incandescent snowfall. At last
it came within musket-shot. All the men were on deck, arms in hand; the
cannoniers were at their guns, the matches burning. It might be thought
they were about to board a frigate and to fight a crew superior in
number to their own, not to attempt the capture of a canoe manned by
four people.

“Surrender!” cried the commander of the _balancelle_, with the aid of
his speaking-trumpet.

The sailors looked at Aramis. Aramis made a sign with his head. Yves
waved a white cloth at the end of a gaff. This was like striking their
flag. The pursuer came on like a race-horse. It launched a fresh Greek
fire, which fell within twenty paces of the little canoe, and threw a
light upon them as white as sunshine.

“At the first sign of resistance,” cried the commander of the
_balancelle_, “fire!” The soldiers brought their muskets to the present.

“Did we not say we surrendered?” said Yves.

“Alive, alive, captain!” cried one excited soldier, “they must be taken
alive.”

“Well, yes--living,” said the captain. Then turning towards the Bretons,
“Your lives are safe, my friends!” cried he, “all but the Chevalier
d’Herblay.”

Aramis stared imperceptibly. For an instant his eye was fixed upon the
depths of the ocean, illumined by the last flashes of the Greek fire,
which ran along the sides of the waves, played on the crests like
plumes, and rendered still darker and more terrible the gulfs they
covered.

“Do you hear, monseigneur?” said the sailors.

“Yes.”

“What are your orders?”

“Accept!”

“But you, monseigneur?”

Aramis leaned still more forward, and dipped the ends of his long white
fingers in the green limpid waters of the sea, to which he turned with
smiles as to a friend.

“Accept!” repeated he.

“We accept,” repeated the sailors; “but what security have we?”

“The word of a gentleman,” said the officer. “By my rank and by my name
I swear that all except M. le Chevalier d’Herblay shall have their lives
spared. I am lieutenant of the king’s frigate the ‘Pomona,’ and my name
is Louis Constant de Pressigny.”

With a rapid gesture, Aramis--already bent over the side of the bark
towards the sea--drew himself up, and with a flashing eye, and a smile
upon his lips, “Throw out the ladder, messieurs,” said he, as if the
command had belonged to him. He was obeyed. When Aramis, seizing the
rope ladder, walked straight up to the commander, with a firm step,
looked at him earnestly, made a sign to him with his hand, a mysterious
and unknown sign at sight of which the officer turned pale, trembled,
and bowed his head, the sailors were profoundly astonished. Without a
word Aramis then raised his hand to the eyes of the commander and showed
him the collet of a ring he wore on the ring-finger of his left hand.
And while making this sign Aramis, draped in cold and haughty majesty,
had the air of an emperor giving his hand to be kissed. The commandant,
who for a moment had raised his head, bowed a second time with marks of
the most profound respect. Then stretching his hand out, in his turn,
towards the poop, that is to say, towards his own cabin, he drew back to
allow Aramis to go first. The three Bretons, who had come on board after
their bishop, looked at each other, stupefied. The crew were awed to
silence. Five minutes after, the commander called the second lieutenant,
who returned immediately, ordering the head to be put towards Corunna.
Whilst this order was being executed, Aramis reappeared upon the deck,
and took a seat near the _bastingage_. Night had fallen; the moon had
not yet risen, yet Aramis looked incessantly towards Belle-Isle. Yves
then approached the captain, who had returned to take his post in the
stern, and said, in a low and humble voice, “What course are we to
follow, captain?”

“We take what course monseigneur pleases,” replied the officer.

Aramis passed the night leaning upon the _bastingage_. Yves, on
approaching him next morning, remarked that “the night must have been
a very damp one, for the wood on which the bishop’s head had rested was
soaked with dew.” Who knows?--that dew was, it may be, the first tears
that had ever fallen from the eyes of Aramis!

What epitaph would have been worth that, good Porthos?



CHAPTER LII.
M. de Gesvres’s Round.

D’Artagnan was little used to resistance like that he had just
experienced. He returned, profoundly irritated, to Nantes. Irritation,
with this vigorous man, usually vented itself in impetuous attack, which
few people, hitherto, were they king, were they giants, had been able to
resist. Trembling with rage, he went straight to the castle, and asked
an audience with the king. It might be about seven o’clock in the
morning, and, since his arrival at Nantes, the king had been an early
riser. But on arriving at the corridor with which we are acquainted,
D’Artagnan found M. de Gesvres, who stopped him politely, telling him
not to speak too loud and disturb the king. “Is the king asleep?” said
D’Artagnan. “Well, I will let him sleep. But about what o’clock do you
suppose he will rise?”

“Oh! in about two hours; his majesty has been up all night.”

D’Artagnan took his hat again, bowed to M. de Gesvres, and returned to
his own apartments. He came back at half-past nine, and was told that
the king was at breakfast. “That will just suit me,” said D’Artagnan. “I
will talk to the king while he is eating.”

M. de Brienne reminded D’Artagnan that the king would not see any one at
meal-time.

“But,” said D’Artagnan, looking askant at Brienne, “you do not know,
perhaps, monsieur, that I have the privilege of _entree_ anywhere--and
at any hour.”

Brienne took the captain’s hand kindly, and said, “Not at Nantes, dear
Monsieur d’Artagnan. The king, in this journey, has changed everything.”

D’Artagnan, a little softened, asked about what o’clock the king would
have finished his breakfast.

“We don’t know.”

“Eh?--don’t know! What does that mean? You don’t know how much time the
king devotes to eating? It is generally an hour; and, if we admit that
the air of the Loire gives an additional appetite, we will extend it to
an hour and a half; that is enough, I think. I will wait where I am.”

“Oh! dear Monsieur d’Artagnan, the order of the day is not to allow any
person to remain in this corridor; I am on guard for that particular
purpose.”

D’Artagnan felt his anger mounting to his brain a second time. He
went out quickly, for fear of complicating the affair by a display of
premature ill-humor. As soon as he was out he began to reflect. “The
king,” said he, “will not receive me, that is evident. The young man is
angry; he is afraid, beforehand, of the words that I may speak to him.
Yes; but in the meantime Belle-Isle is besieged, and my two friends by
now probably taken or killed. Poor Porthos! As to Master Aramis, he is
always full of resources, and I am easy on his account. But, no, no;
Porthos is not yet an invalid, nor is Aramis in his dotage. The one
with his arm, the other with his imagination, will find work for his
majesty’s soldiers. Who knows if these brave men may not get up for
the edification of his most Christian majesty a little bastion of
Saint-Gervais! I don’t despair of it. They have cannon and a garrison.
And yet,” continued D’Artagnan, “I don’t know whether it would not
be better to stop the combat. For myself alone I will not put up with
either surly looks or insults from the king; but for my friends I must
put up with everything. Shall I go to M. Colbert? Now, there is a man
I must acquire the habit of terrifying. I will go to M. Colbert.” And
D’Artagnan set forward bravely to find M. Colbert, but was informed that
he was working with the king, at the castle of Nantes. “Good!” cried he,
“the times have come again in which I measured my steps from De Treville
to the cardinal, from the cardinal to the queen, from the queen to
Louis XIII. Truly is it said that men, in growing old, become children
again!--To the castle, then!” He returned thither. M. de Lyonne was
coming out. He gave D’Artagnan both hands, but told him that the king
had been busy all the preceding evening and all night, and that orders
had been given that no one should be admitted. “Not even the captain who
takes the order?” cried D’Artagnan. “I think that is rather too strong.”

“Not even he,” said M. de Lyonne.

“Since that is the case,” replied D’Artagnan, wounded to the heart;
“since the captain of the musketeers, who has always entered the
king’s chamber, is no longer allowed to enter it, his cabinet, or
his _salle-a-manger_, either the king is dead, or his captain is in
disgrace. Do me the favor, then, M. de Lyonne, who are in favor, to
return and tell the king, plainly, I send him my resignation.”

“D’Artagnan, beware of what you are doing!”

“For friendship’s sake, go!” and he pushed him gently towards the
cabinet.

“Well, I will go,” said Lyonne.

D’Artagnan waited, walking about the corridor in no enviable mood.
Lyonne returned.

“Well, what did the king say?” exclaimed D’Artagnan.

“He simply answered, ‘’Tis well,’” replied Lyonne.

“That it was well!” said the captain, with an explosion. “That is to
say, that he accepts it? Good! Now, then, I am free! I am only a plain
citizen, M. de Lyonne. I have the pleasure of bidding you good-bye!
Farewell, castle, corridor, ante-chamber! a _bourgeois_, about to
breathe at liberty, takes his farewell of you.”

And without waiting longer, the captain sprang from the terrace down the
staircase, where he had picked up the fragments of Gourville’s letter.
Five minutes after, he was at the hostelry, where, according to the
custom of all great officers who have lodgings at the castle, he had
taken what was called his city-chamber. But when he arrived there,
instead of throwing off his sword and cloak, he took his pistols, put
his money into a large leather purse, sent for his horses from the
castle-stables, and gave orders that would ensure their reaching Vannes
during the night. Everything went on according to his wishes. At eight
o’clock in the evening, he was putting his foot in the stirrup, when
M. de Gesvres appeared, at the head of twelve guards, in front of the
hostelry. D’Artagnan saw all from the corner of his eye; he could not
fail seeing thirteen men and thirteen horses. But he feigned not to
observe anything, and was about to put his horse in motion. Gesvres rode
up to him. “Monsieur d’Artagnan!” said he, aloud.

“Ah, Monsieur de Gesvres! good evening!”

“One would say you were getting on horseback.”

“More than that,--I am mounted,--as you see.”

“It is fortunate I have met with you.”

“Were you looking for me, then?”

“_Mon Dieu!_ yes.”

“On the part of the king, I will wager?”

“Yes.”

“As I, three days ago, went in search of M. Fouquet?”

“Oh!”

“Nonsense! It is of no use being over-delicate with me; that is all
labor lost. Tell me at once you are come to arrest me.”

“To arrest you?--Good heavens! no.”

“Why do you come to accost me with twelve horsemen at your heels, then?”

“I am making my round.”

“That isn’t bad! And so you pick me up in your round, eh?”

“I don’t pick you up; I meet with you, and I beg you to come with me.”

“Where?”

“To the king.”

“Good!” said D’Artagnan, with a bantering air; “the king is disengaged.”

“For Heaven’s sake, captain,” said M. de Gesvres, in a low voice to the
musketeer, “do not compromise yourself! these men hear you.”

D’Artagnan laughed aloud, and replied:

“March! People who are arrested are placed between the six first guards
and the six last.”

“But as I am not arresting you,” said M. de Gesvres, “you will march
behind, with me, if you please.”

“Well,” said D’Artagnan, “that is very polite, duke, and you are
right in being so; for if ever I had had to make my rounds near your
_chambre-de-ville_, I should have been courteous to you, I assure you,
on the word of a gentleman! Now, one favor more; what does the king want
with me?”

“Oh, the king is furious!”

“Very well! the king, who has thought it worth while to be angry, may
take the trouble to grow calm again; that is all. I shan’t die of that,
I will swear.”

“No, but--”

“But--I shall be sent to keep company with unfortunate M. Fouquet.
_Mordioux!_ That is a gallant man, a worthy man! We shall live very
sociably together, I will be sworn.”

“Here we are at our place of destination,” said the duke. “Captain, for
Heaven’s sake be calm with the king!”

“Ah! ah! you are playing the brave man with me, duke!” said D’Artagnan,
throwing one of his defiant glances over Gesvres. “I have been told
that you are ambitious of uniting your guards with my musketeers. This
strikes me as a splendid opportunity.”

“I will take exceeding good care not to avail myself of it, captain.”

“And why not, pray?”

“Oh, for many reasons--in the first place, for this: if I were to
succeed you in the musketeers after having arrested you--”

“Ah! then you admit you have arrested me?”

“No, I _don’t_.”

“Say met me, then. So, you were saying _if_ you were to succeed me after
having arrested me?”

“Your musketeers, at the first exercise with ball cartridges, would fire
_my_ way, by mistake.”

“Oh, as to that I won’t say; for the fellows _do_ love me a little.”

Gesvres made D’Artagnan pass in first, and took him straight to the
cabinet where Louis was waiting for his captain of the musketeers, and
placed himself behind his colleague in the ante-chamber. The king could
be heard distinctly, speaking aloud to Colbert in the same cabinet where
Colbert might have heard, a few days before, the king speaking aloud
with M. d’Artagnan. The guards remained as a mounted picket before the
principal gate; and the report was quickly spread throughout the city
that monsieur le capitaine of the musketeers had been arrested by order
of the king. Then these men were seen to be in motion, and as in the
good old times of Louis XIII. and M. de Treville, groups were formed,
and staircases were filled; vague murmurs, issuing from the court below,
came rolling to the upper stories, like the distant moaning of the
waves. M. de Gesvres became uneasy. He looked at his guards, who, after
being interrogated by the musketeers who had just got among their ranks,
began to shun them with a manifestation of innocence. D’Artagnan was
certainly less disturbed by all this than M. de Gesvres, the captain of
the guards. As soon as he entered, he seated himself on the ledge of a
window whence with his eagle glance he saw all that was going on without
the least emotion. No step of the progressive fermentation which had
shown itself at the report of his arrest escaped him. He foresaw
the very moment the explosion would take place; and we know that his
previsions were in general correct.

“It would be very whimsical,” thought he, “if, this evening, my
praetorians should make me king of France. How I should laugh!”

But, at the height, all was stopped. Guards, musketeers, officers,
soldiers, murmurs, uneasiness, dispersed, vanished, died away; there was
an end of menace and sedition. One word had calmed the waves. The king
had desired Brienne to say, “Hush, messieurs! you disturb the king.”

D’Artagnan sighed. “All is over!” said he; “the musketeers of the
present day are not those of his majesty Louis XIII. All is over!”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan, you are wanted in the ante-chamber of the king,”
 proclaimed an usher.



CHAPTER LIII.
King Louis XIV.

The king was seated in his cabinet, with his back turned towards the
door of entrance. In front of him was a mirror, in which, while turning
over his papers, he could see at a glance those who came in. He did
not take any notice of the entrance of D’Artagnan, but spread above his
letters and plans the large silk cloth he used to conceal his secrets
from the importunate. D’Artagnan understood this by-play, and kept
in the background; so that at the end of a minute the king, who heard
nothing, and saw nothing save from the corner of his eye, was obliged to
cry, “Is not M. d’Artagnan there?”

“I am here, sire,” replied the musketeer, advancing.

“Well, monsieur,” said the king, fixing his pellucid eyes on D’Artagnan,
“what have you to say to me?”

“I, sire!” replied the latter, who watched the first blow of his
adversary to make a good retort; “I have nothing to say to your majesty,
unless it be that you have caused me to be arrested, and here I am.”

The king was going to reply that he had not had D’Artagnan arrested, but
any such sentence appeared too much like an excuse, and he was silent.
D’Artagnan likewise preserved an obstinate silence.

“Monsieur,” at length resumed the king, “what did I charge you to go and
do at Belle-Isle? Tell me, if you please.”

The king while uttering these words looked intently at his captain.
Here D’Artagnan was fortunate; the king seemed to place the game in his
hands.

“I believe,” replied he, “that your majesty does me the honor to ask
what I went to Belle-Isle to accomplish?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Well! sire, I know nothing about it; it is not of me that question
should be asked, but of that infinite number of officers of all kinds,
to whom have been given innumerable orders of all kinds, whilst to me,
head of the expedition, nothing precise was said or stated in any form
whatever.”

The king was hurt: he showed it by his reply. “Monsieur,” said he,
“orders have only been given to such as were judged faithful.”

“And, therefore, I have been astonished, sire,” retorted the musketeer,
“that a captain like myself, who ranks with a marechal of France,
should have found himself under the orders of five or six lieutenants or
majors, good to make spies of, possibly, but not at all fit to conduct
a warlike expedition. It was upon this subject I came to demand an
explanation of your majesty, when I found the door closed against me,
which, the final insult offered to a brave man, has led me to quit your
majesty’s service.”

“Monsieur,” replied the king, “you still believe that you are living in
an age when kings were, as you complain of having been, under the orders
and at the discretion of their inferiors. You seem to forget that a king
owes an account of his actions to none but God.”

“I forget nothing, sire,” said the musketeer, wounded by this lesson.
“Besides, I do not see in what an honest man, when he asks of his king
how he has ill-served him, offends him.”

“You have ill-served me, monsieur, by siding with my enemies against
me.”

“Who are your enemies, sire?”

“The men I sent you to fight.”

“Two men the enemies of the whole of your majesty’s army! That is
incredible.”

“You have no power to judge of my will.”

“But I have to judge of my own friendships, sire.”

“He who serves his friends does not serve his master.”

“I so well understand this, sire, that I have respectfully offered your
majesty my resignation.”

“And I have accepted it, monsieur,” said the king. “Before being
separated from you I was willing to prove to you that I know how to keep
my word.”

“Your majesty has kept more than your word, for your majesty has had me
arrested,” said D’Artagnan, with his cold, bantering air; “you did not
promise me that, sire.”

The king would not condescend to perceive the pleasantry, and continued,
seriously, “You see, monsieur, to what grave steps your disobedience
forces me.”

“My disobedience!” cried D’Artagnan, red with anger.

“It is the mildest term that I can find,” pursued the king. “My idea was
to take and punish rebels; was I bound to inquire whether these rebels
were your friends or not?”

“But I was,” replied D’Artagnan. “It was a cruelty on your majesty’s
part to send me to capture my friends and lead them to your gibbets.”

“It was a trial I had to make, monsieur, of pretended servants, who eat
my bread and _should_ defend my person. The trial has succeeded ill,
Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“For one bad servant your majesty loses,” said the musketeer, with
bitterness, “there are ten who, on that same day, go through a like
ordeal. Listen to me, sire; I am not accustomed to that service. Mine
is a rebel sword when I am required to do ill. It was ill to send me
in pursuit of two men whose lives M. Fouquet, your majesty’s preserver,
implored you to save. Still further, these men were my friends. They did
not attack your majesty, they succumbed to your blind anger. Besides,
why were they not allowed to escape? What crime had they committed? I
admit you may contest with me the right of judging their conduct.
But why suspect me before the action? Why surround me with spies? Why
disgrace me before the army? Why me, in whom till now you showed the
most entire confidence--who for thirty years have been attached to your
person, and have given you a thousand proofs of my devotion--for it must
be said, now that I am accused--why reduce me to see three thousand of
the king’s soldiers march in battle against two men?”

“One would say you have forgotten what these men have done to me!” said
the king, in a hollow voice, “and that it was no merit of theirs I was
not lost.”

“Sire, one would imagine you forget that I was there.”

“Enough, Monsieur d’Artagnan, enough of these dominating interests which
arise to keep the sun itself from my interests. I am founding a state in
which there shall be but one master, as I promised you; the moment is at
hand for me to keep my promise. You wish to be, according to your tastes
or private friendships, free to destroy my plans and save my enemies? I
will thwart you or will drop you--seek a more compliant master. I know
full well that another king would not conduct himself as I do, and would
allow himself to be dominated by you, at the risk of sending you
some day to keep company with M. Fouquet and the rest; but I have an
excellent memory, and for me, services are sacred titles to gratitude,
to impunity. You shall only have this lesson, Monsieur d’Artagnan, as
the punishment of your want of discipline, and I will not imitate my
predecessors in anger, not having imitated them in favor. And, then,
other reasons make me act mildly towards you; in the first place,
because you are a man of sense, a man of excellent sense, a man of
heart, and that you will be a capital servant to him who shall have
mastered you; secondly, because you will cease to have any motives for
insubordination. Your friends are now destroyed or ruined by me. These
supports on which your capricious mind instinctively relied I have
caused to disappear. At this moment, my soldiers have taken or killed
the rebels of Belle-Isle.”

D’Artagnan became pale. “Taken or killed!” cried he. “Oh! sire, if you
thought what you tell, if you were sure you were telling me the truth,
I should forget all that is just, all that is magnanimous in your words,
to call you a barbarous king, and an unnatural man. But I pardon you
these words,” said he, smiling with pride; “I pardon them to a young
prince who does not know, who cannot comprehend what such men as M.
d’Herblay, M. du Vallon, and myself are. Taken or killed! Ah! Ah! sire!
tell me, if the news is true, how much has it cost you in men and money.
We will then reckon if the game has been worth the stakes.”

As he spoke thus, the king went up to him in great anger, and said,
“Monsieur d’Artagnan, your replies are those of a rebel! Tell me, if you
please, who is king of France? Do you know any other?”

“Sire,” replied the captain of the musketeers, coldly, “I very well
remember that one morning at Vaux you addressed that question to many
people who did not answer to it, whilst I, on my part, did answer to
it. If I recognized my king on that day, when the thing was not easy,
I think it would be useless to ask the question of me now, when your
majesty and I are alone.”

At these words Louis cast down his eyes. It appeared to him that the
shade of the unfortunate Philippe passed between D’Artagnan and himself,
to evoke the remembrance of that terrible adventure. Almost at the same
moment an officer entered and placed a dispatch in the hands of the
king, who, in his turn, changed color, while reading it.

“Monsieur,” said he, “what I learn here you would know later; it is
better I should tell you, and that you should learn it from the mouth of
your king. A battle has taken place at Belle-Isle.”

“Is it possible?” said D’Artagnan, with a calm air, though his heart was
beating fast enough to choke him. “Well, sire?”

“Well, monsieur--and I have lost a hundred and ten men.”

A beam of joy and pride shone in the eyes of D’Artagnan. “And the
rebels?” said he.

“The rebels have fled,” said the king.

D’Artagnan could not restrain a cry of triumph. “Only,” added the king,
“I have a fleet which closely blockades Belle-Isle, and I am certain not
a bark can escape.”

“So that,” said the musketeer, brought back to his dismal idea, “if
these two gentlemen are taken--”

“They will be hanged,” said the king, quietly.

“And do they know it?” replied D’Artagnan, repressing his trembling.

“They know it, because you must have told them yourself; and all the
country knows it.”

“Then, sire, they will never be taken alive, I will answer for that.”

“Ah!” said the king, negligently, and taking up his letter again. “Very
well, they will be dead, then, Monsieur d’Artagnan, and that will come
to the same thing, since I should only take them to have them hanged.”

D’Artagnan wiped the sweat which flowed from his brow.

“I have told you,” pursued Louis XIV., “that I would one day be an
affectionate, generous, and constant master. You are now the only man of
former times worthy of my anger or my friendship. I will not spare you
either sentiment, according to your conduct. Could you serve a king,
Monsieur d’Artagnan, who should have a hundred kings, his equals, in
the kingdom? Could I, tell me, do with such weak instruments the great
things I meditate? Did you ever see an artist effect great works with
an unworthy tool? Far from us, monsieur, the old leaven of feudal abuse!
The Fronde, which threatened to ruin monarchy, has emancipated it. I
am master at home, Captain d’Artagnan, and I shall have servants who,
lacking, perhaps, your genius, will carry devotion and obedience to the
verge of heroism. Of what consequence, I ask you, of what consequence
is it that God has given no sense to arms and legs? It is to the head he
has given genius, and the head, you know, the rest obey. I am the head.”

D’Artagnan started. Louis XIV. continued as if he had seen nothing,
although this emotion had not by any means escaped him. “Now, let us
conclude between us two the bargain I promised to make with you one day
when you found me in a very strange predicament at Blois. Do me justice,
monsieur, when you admit I do not make any one pay for the tears of
shame that I then shed. Look around you; lofty heads have bowed. Bow
yours, or choose such exile as will suit you. Perhaps, when reflecting
upon it, you will find your king has a generous heart, who reckons
sufficiently upon your loyalty to allow you to leave him dissatisfied,
when you possess a great state secret. You are a brave man; I know you
to be so. Why have you judged me prematurely? Judge me from this day
forward, D’Artagnan, and be as severe as you please.”

D’Artagnan remained bewildered, mute, undecided for the first time in
his life. At last he had found an adversary worthy of him. This was no
longer trick, it was calculation; no longer violence, but strength; no
longer passion, but will; no longer boasting, but council. This young
man who had brought down a Fouquet, and could do without a D’Artagnan,
deranged the somewhat headstrong calculations of the musketeer.

“Come, let us see what stops you?” said the king, kindly. “You have
given in your resignation; shall I refuse to accept it? I admit that it
may be hard for such an old captain to recover lost good-humor.”

“Oh!” replied D’Artagnan, in a melancholy tone, “that is not my most
serious care. I hesitate to take back my resignation because I am old in
comparison with you, and have habits difficult to abandon. Henceforward,
you must have courtiers who know how to amuse you--madmen who will get
themselves killed to carry out what you call your great works. Great
they will be, I feel--but, if by chance I should not think them so?
I have seen war, sire, I have seen peace; I have served Richelieu and
Mazarin; I have been scorched with your father, at the fire of Rochelle;
riddled with sword-thrusts like a sieve, having grown a new skin ten
times, as serpents do. After affronts and injustices, I have a command
which was formerly something, because it gave the bearer the right of
speaking as he liked to his king. But your captain of the musketeers
will henceforward be an officer guarding the outer doors. Truly, sire,
if that is to be my employment from this time, seize the opportunity of
our being on good terms, to take it from me. Do not imagine that I bear
malice; no, you have tamed me, as you say; but it must be confessed that
in taming me you have lowered me; by bowing me you have convicted me of
weakness. If you knew how well it suits me to carry my head high,
and what a pitiful mien I shall have while scenting the dust of your
carpets! Oh! sire, I regret sincerely, and you will regret as I do, the
old days when the king of France saw in every vestibule those insolent
gentlemen, lean, always swearing--cross-grained mastiffs, who could bite
mortally in the hour of danger or of battle. These men were the best of
courtiers to the hand which fed them--they would lick it; but for the
hand that struck them, oh! the bite that followed! A little gold on the
lace of their cloaks, a slender stomach in their _hauts-de-chausses_,
a little sparkling of gray in their dry hair, and you will behold the
handsome dukes and peers, the haughty _marechaux_ of France. But why
should I tell you all this? The king is master; he wills that I
should make verses, he wills that I should polish the mosaics of his
ante-chambers with satin shoes. _Mordioux!_ that is difficult, but I
have got over greater difficulties. I will do it. Why should I do it?
Because I love money?--I have enough. Because I am ambitious?--my career
is almost at an end. Because I love the court? No. I will remain here
because I have been accustomed for thirty years to go and take the
orderly word of the king, and to have said to me ‘Good evening,
D’Artagnan,’ with a smile I did not beg for. That smile I will beg for!
Are you content, sire?” And D’Artagnan bowed his silver head, upon which
the smiling king placed his white hand with pride.

 “Thanks, my old servant, my faithful friend,” said he. “As, reckoning
from this day, I have no longer any enemies in France, it remains with
me to send you to a foreign field to gather your marshal’s baton. Depend
upon me for finding you an opportunity. In the meanwhile, eat of my very
best bread, and sleep in absolute tranquillity.”

“That is all kind and well!” said D’Artagnan, much agitated. “But those
poor men at Belle-Isle? One of them, in particular--so good! so brave!
so true!”

“Do you ask their pardon of me?”

“Upon my knees, sire!”

“Well! then, go and take it to them, if it be still in time. But do you
answer for them?”

“With my life, sire.”

“Go, then. To-morrow I set out for Paris. Return by that time, for I do
not wish you to leave me in the future.”

“Be assured of that, sire,” said D’Artagnan, kissing the royal hand.

And with a heart swelling with joy, he rushed out of the castle on his
way to Belle-Isle.



CHAPTER LIV.
M. Fouquet’s Friends.

The king had returned to Paris, and with him D’Artagnan, who, in
twenty-four hours, having made with greatest care all possible inquiries
at Belle-Isle, succeeded in learning nothing of the secret so well kept
by the heavy rock of Locmaria, which had fallen on the heroic Porthos.
The captain of the musketeers only knew what those two valiant
men--these two friends, whose defense he had so nobly taken up, whose
lives he had so earnestly endeavored to save--aided by three faithful
Bretons, had accomplished against a whole army. He had seen, spread on
the neighboring heath, the human remains which had stained with clouted
blood the scattered stones among the flowering broom. He learned also
that a bark had been seen far out at sea, and that, like a bird of prey,
a royal vessel had pursued, overtaken, and devoured the poor little
bird that was flying with such palpitating wings. But there D’Artagnan’s
certainties ended. The field of supposition was thrown open. Now, what
could he conjecture? The vessel had not returned. It is true that a
brisk wind had prevailed for three days; but the corvette was known to
be a good sailer and solid in its timbers; it had no need to fear a gale
of wind, and it ought, according to the calculation of D’Artagnan, to
have either returned to Brest, or come back to the mouth of the Loire.
Such was the news, ambiguous, it is true, but in some degree reassuring
to him personally, which D’Artagnan brought to Louis XIV., when the
king, followed by all the court, returned to Paris.

Louis, satisfied with his success--Louis, more mild and affable as he
felt himself more powerful--had not ceased for an instant to ride beside
the carriage door of Mademoiselle de la Valliere. Everybody was anxious
to amuse the two queens, so as to make them forget this abandonment by
son and husband. Everything breathed the future, the past was nothing to
anybody. Only that past was like a painful bleeding wound to the hearts
of certain tender and devoted spirits. Scarcely was the king reinstalled
in Paris, when he received a touching proof of this. Louis XIV. had
just risen and taken his first repast when his captain of the musketeers
presented himself before him. D’Artagnan was pale and looked unhappy.
The king, at the first glance, perceived the change in a countenance
generally so unconcerned. “What is the matter, D’Artagnan?” said he.

“Sire, a great misfortune has happened to me.”

“Good heavens! what is that?”

“Sire, I have lost one of my friends, M. du Vallon, in the affair of
Belle-Isle.”

And, while speaking these words, D’Artagnan fixed his falcon eye upon
Louis XIV., to catch the first feeling that would show itself.

“I knew it,” replied the king, quietly.

“You knew it, and did not tell me!” cried the musketeer.

“To what good? Your grief, my friend, was so well worthy of respect. It
was my duty to treat it gently. To have informed you of this misfortune,
which I knew would pain you so greatly, D’Artagnan, would have been, in
your eyes, to have triumphed over you. Yes, I knew that M. du Vallon had
buried himself beneath the rocks of Locmaria; I knew that M. d’Herblay
had taken one of my vessels with its crew, and had compelled it to
convey him to Bayonne. But I was willing you should learn these matters
in a direct manner, in order that you might be convinced my friends are
with me respected and sacred; that always in me the man will sacrifice
himself to subjects, whilst the king is so often found to sacrifice men
to majesty and power.”

“But, sire, how could you know?”

“How do you yourself know, D’Artagnan?”

“By this letter, sire, which M. d’Herblay, free and out of danger,
writes me from Bayonne.”

“Look here,” said the king, drawing from a casket placed upon the table
closet to the seat upon which D’Artagnan was leaning, “here is a letter
copied exactly from that of M. d’Herblay. Here is the very letter, which
Colbert placed in my hands a week before you received yours. I am well
served, you may perceive.”

“Yes, sire,” murmured the musketeer, “you were the only man whose star
was equal to the task of dominating the fortune and strength of my two
friends. You have used your power, sire, you will not abuse it, will
you?”

“D’Artagnan,” said the king, with a smile beaming with kindness, “I
could have M. d’Herblay carried off from the territories of the king
of Spain, and brought here, alive, to inflict justice upon him. But,
D’Artagnan, be assured I will not yield to this first and natural
impulse. He is free--let him continue free.”

“Oh, sire! you will not always remain so clement, so noble, so generous
as you have shown yourself with respect to me and M. d’Herblay; you will
have about you counselors who will cure you of that weakness.”

“No, D’Artagnan, you are mistaken when you accuse my council of urging
me to pursue rigorous measures. The advice to spare M. d’Herblay comes
from Colbert himself.”

“Oh, sire!” said D’Artagnan, extremely surprised.

“As for you,” continued the king, with a kindness very uncommon to him,
“I have several pieces of good news to announce to you; but you shall
know them, my dear captain, the moment I have made my accounts all
straight. I have said that I wish to make, and would make, your fortune;
that promise will soon become reality.”

“A thousand times thanks, sire! I can wait. But I implore you, whilst I
go and practice patience, that your majesty will deign to notice those
poor people who have for so long a time besieged your ante-chamber, and
come humbly to lay a petition at your feet.”

“Who are they?”

“Enemies of your majesty.” The king raised his head.

“Friends of M. Fouquet,” added D’Artagnan.

“Their names?”

“M. Gourville, M. Pelisson, and a poet, M. Jean de la Fontaine.”

The king took a moment to reflect. “What do they want?”

“I do not know.”

“How do they appear?”

“In great affliction.”

“What do they say?”

“Nothing.”

“What do they do?”

“They weep.”

“Let them come in,” said the king, with a serious brow.

D’Artagnan turned rapidly on his heel, raised the tapestry which closed
the entrance to the royal chamber, and directing his voice to the
adjoining room, cried, “Enter.”

The three men D’Artagnan had named immediately appeared at the door of
the cabinet in which were the king and his captain. A profound silence
prevailed in their passage. The courtiers, at the approach of the
friends of the unfortunate superintendent of finances, drew back, as
if fearful of being affected by contagion with disgrace and misfortune.
D’Artagnan, with a quick step, came forward to take by the hand the
unhappy men who stood trembling at the door of the cabinet; he led them
in front of the king’s _fauteuil_, who, having placed himself in the
embrasure of a window, awaited the moment of presentation, and was
preparing himself to give the supplicants a rigorously diplomatic
reception.

The first of the friends of Fouquet’s to advance was Pelisson. He did
not weep, but his tears were only restrained that the king might better
hear his voice and prayer. Gourville bit his lips to check his tears,
out of respect for the king. La Fontaine buried his face in his
handkerchief, and the only signs of life he gave were the convulsive
motions of his shoulders, raised by his sobs.

The king preserved his dignity. His countenance was impassible. He
even maintained the frown which appeared when D’Artagnan announced his
enemies. He made a gesture which signified, “Speak;” and he remained
standing, with his eyes fixed searchingly on these desponding men.
Pelisson bowed to the ground, and La Fontaine knelt as people do in
churches. This dismal silence, disturbed only by sighs and groans, began
to excite in the king, not compassion, but impatience.

“Monsieur Pelisson,” said he, in a sharp, dry tone. “Monsieur Gourville,
and you, Monsieur--” and he did not name La Fontaine, “I cannot, without
sensible displeasure, see you come to plead for one of the greatest
criminals it is the duty of justice to punish. A king does not allow
himself to soften save at the tears of the innocent, the remorse of the
guilty. I have no faith either in the remorse of M. Fouquet or the tears
of his friends, because the one is tainted to the very heart, and the
others ought to dread offending me in my own palace. For these reasons,
I beg you, Monsieur Pelisson, Monsieur Gourville, and you, Monsieur--,
to say nothing that will not plainly proclaim the respect you have for
my will.”

“Sire,” replied Pelisson, trembling at these words, “we are come to say
nothing to your majesty that is not the most profound expression of
the most sincere respect and love that are due to a king from all his
subjects. Your majesty’s justice is redoubtable; every one must yield to
the sentences it pronounces. We respectfully bow before it. Far from us
the idea of coming to defend him who has had the misfortune to offend
your majesty. He who has incurred your displeasure may be a friend of
ours, but he is an enemy to the state. We abandon him, but with tears,
to the severity of the king.”

“Besides,” interrupted the king, calmed by that supplicating voice,
and those persuasive words, “my parliament will decide. I do not strike
without first having weighed the crime; my justice does not wield the
sword without employing first a pair of scales.”

“Therefore we have every confidence in that impartiality of the king,
and hope to make our feeble voices heard, with the consent of your
majesty, when the hour for defending an accused friend strikes.”

“In that case, messieurs, what do you ask of me?” said the king, with
his most imposing air.

“Sire,” continued Pelisson, “the accused has a wife and family. The
little property he had was scarcely sufficient to pay his debts,
and Madame Fouquet, since her husband’s captivity, is abandoned by
everybody. The hand of your majesty strikes like the hand of God. When
the Lord sends the curse of leprosy or pestilence into a family,
every one flies and shuns the abode of the leprous or plague-stricken.
Sometimes, but very rarely, a generous physician alone ventures to
approach the ill-reputed threshold, passes it with courage, and risks
his life to combat death. He is the last resource of the dying, the
chosen instrument of heavenly mercy. Sire, we supplicate you, with
clasped hands and bended knees, as a divinity is supplicated! Madame
Fouquet has no longer any friends, no longer any means of support; she
weeps in her deserted home, abandoned by all those who besieged its
doors in the hour of prosperity; she has neither credit nor hope left.
At least, the unhappy wretch upon whom your anger falls receives from
you, however culpable he may be, his daily bread though moistened by
his tears. As much afflicted, more destitute than her husband, Madame
Fouquet--the lady who had the honor to receive your majesty at her
table--Madame Fouquet, the wife of the ancient superintendent of your
majesty’s finances, Madame Fouquet has no longer bread.”

Here the mortal silence which had chained the breath of Pelisson’s two
friends was broken by an outburst of sobs; and D’Artagnan, whose chest
heaved at hearing this humble prayer, turned round towards the angle of
the cabinet to bite his mustache and conceal a groan.

The king had preserved his eye dry and his countenance severe; but
the blood had mounted to his cheeks, and the firmness of his look was
visibly diminished.

“What do you wish?” said he, in an agitated voice.

“We come humbly to ask your majesty,” replied Pelisson, upon whom
emotion was fast gaining, “to permit us, without incurring the
displeasure of your majesty, to lend to Madame Fouquet two thousand
pistoles collected among the old friends of her husband, in order that
the widow may not stand in need of the necessaries of life.”

At the word _widow_, pronounced by Pelisson whilst Fouquet was still
alive, the king turned very pale;--his pride disappeared; pity rose from
his heart to his lips; he cast a softened look upon the men who knelt
sobbing at his feet.

“God forbid,” said he, “that I should confound the innocent with the
guilty. They know me but ill who doubt my mercy towards the weak. I
strike none but the arrogant. Do, messieurs, do all that your hearts
counsel you to assuage the grief of Madame Fouquet. Go, messieurs--go!”

The three now rose in silence with dry eyes. The tears had been scorched
away by contact with their burning cheeks and eyelids. They had not
the strength to address their thanks to the king, who himself cut short
their solemn reverences by entrenching himself suddenly behind the
_fauteuil_.

D’Artagnan remained alone with the king.

“Well,” said he, approaching the young prince, who interrogated him with
his look. “Well, my master! If you had not the device which belongs to
your sun, I would recommend you one which M. Conrart might translate
into eclectic Latin, ‘Calm with the lowly; stormy with the strong.’”

The king smiled, and passed into the next apartment, after having said
to D’Artagnan, “I give you the leave of absence you must want to put the
affairs of your friend, the late M. du Vallon, in order.”



CHAPTER LV.
Porthos’s Will.

At Pierrefonds everything was in mourning. The courts were deserted--the
stables closed--the parterres neglected. In the basins, the fountains,
formerly so jubilantly fresh and noisy, had stopped of themselves. Along
the roads around the chateau came a few grave personages mounted on
mules or country nags. These were rural neighbors, cures and bailiffs of
adjacent estates. All these people entered the chateau silently, handed
their horses to a melancholy-looking groom, and directed their steps,
conducted by a huntsman in black, to the great dining-room, where
Mousqueton received them at the door. Mousqueton had become so thin in
two days that his clothes moved upon him like an ill-fitting scabbard in
which the sword-blade dances at each motion. His face, composed of red
and white, like that of the Madonna of Vandyke, was furrowed by two
silver rivulets which had dug their beds in his cheeks, as full formerly
as they had become flabby since his grief began. At each fresh arrival,
Mousqueton found fresh tears, and it was pitiful to see him press
his throat with his fat hand to keep from bursting into sobs and
lamentations. All these visits were for the purpose of hearing the
reading of Porthos’s will, announced for that day, and at which all the
covetous friends of the dead man were anxious to be present, as he had
left no relations behind him.

The visitors took their places as they arrived, and the great room had
just been closed when the clock struck twelve, the hour fixed for the
reading of the important document. Porthos’s procureur--and that
was naturally the successor of Master Coquenard--commenced by slowly
unfolding the vast parchment upon which the powerful hand of Porthos had
traced his sovereign will. The seal broken--the spectacles put on--the
preliminary cough having sounded--every one pricked up his ears.
Mousqueton had squatted himself in a corner, the better to weep and the
better to hear. All at once the folding-doors of the great room, which
had been shut, were thrown open as if by magic, and a warlike figure
appeared upon the threshold, resplendent in the full light of the sun.
This was D’Artagnan, who had come alone to the gate, and finding nobody
to hold his stirrup, had tied his horse to the knocker and announced
himself. The splendor of daylight invading the room, the murmur of all
present, and, more than all, the instinct of the faithful dog, drew
Mousqueton from his reverie; he raised his head, recognized the old
friend of his master, and, screaming with grief, he embraced his knees,
watering the floor with his tears. D’Artagnan raised the poor intendant,
embraced him as if he had been a brother, and, having nobly saluted the
assembly, who all bowed as they whispered to each other his name, he
went and took his seat at the extremity of the great carved oak hall,
still holding by the hand poor Mousqueton, who was suffocating with
excess of woe, and sank upon the steps. Then the procureur, who, like
the rest, was considerably agitated, commenced.

Porthos, after a profession of faith of the most Christian character,
asked pardon of his enemies for all the injuries he might have done
them. At this paragraph, a ray of inexpressible pride beamed from the
eyes of D’Artagnan.

He recalled to his mind the old soldier; all those enemies of Porthos
brought to earth by his valiant hand; he reckoned up the numbers
of them, and said to himself that Porthos had acted wisely, not to
enumerate his enemies or the injuries done to them, or the task would
have been too much for the reader. Then came the following schedule of
his extensive lands:

“I possess at this present time, by the grace of God--

“1. The domain of Pierrefonds, lands, woods, meadows, waters, and
forests, surrounded by good walls.

“2. The domain of Bracieux, chateaux, forests, plowed lands, forming
three farms.

“3. The little estate Du Vallon, so named because it is in the valley.”
 (Brave Porthos!)

“4. Fifty farms in Touraine, amounting to five hundred acres.

“5. Three mills upon the Cher, bringing in six hundred livres each.

“6. Three fish-pools in Berry, producing two hundred livres a year.

“As to my personal or movable property, so called because it can be
moved, as is so well explained by my learned friend the bishop of
Vannes--” (D’Artagnan shuddered at the dismal remembrance attached to
that name)--the procureur continued imperturbably--“they consist--”

“1. In goods which I cannot detail here for want of room, and which
furnish all my chateaux or houses, but of which the list is drawn up by
my intendant.”

Every one turned his eyes towards Mousqueton, who was still lost in
grief.

“2. In twenty horses for saddle and draught, which I have particularly
at my chateau of Pierrefonds, and which are called--Bayard, Roland,
Charlemagne, Pepin, Dunois, La Hire, Ogier, Samson, Milo, Nimrod,
Urganda, Armida, Flastrade, Dalilah, Rebecca, Yolande, Finette,
Grisette, Lisette, and Musette.

“3. In sixty dogs, forming six packs, divided as follows: the first, for
the stag; the second, for the wolf; the third, for the wild boar; the
fourth, for the hare; and the two others, for setters and protection.

“4. In arms for war and the chase contained in my gallery of arms.

“5. My wines of Anjou, selected for Athos, who liked them formerly;
my wines of Burgundy, Champagne, Bordeaux, and Spain, stocking eight
cellars and twelve vaults, in my various houses.

“6. My pictures and statues, which are said to be of great value, and
which are sufficiently numerous to fatigue the sight.

“7. My library, consisting of six thousand volumes, quite new, and have
never been opened.

“8. My silver plate, which is perhaps a little worn, but which ought to
weigh from a thousand to twelve hundred pounds, for I had great trouble
in lifting the coffer that contained it and could not carry it more than
six times round my chamber.

“9. All these objects, in addition to the table and house linen, are
divided in the residences I liked the best.”

Here the reader stopped to take breath. Every one sighed, coughed, and
redoubled his attention. The procureur resumed:

“I have lived without having any children, and it is probable I never
shall have any, which to me is a cutting grief. And yet I am mistaken,
for I have a son, in common with my other friends; that is, M. Raoul
Auguste Jules de Bragelonne, the true son of M. le Comte de la Fere.

“This young nobleman appears to me extremely worthy to succeed the
valiant gentleman of whom I am the friend and very humble servant.”

Here a sharp sound interrupted the reader. It was D’Artagnan’s sword,
which, slipping from his baldric, had fallen on the sonorous flooring.
Every one turned his eyes that way, and saw that a large tear had rolled
from the thick lid of D’Artagnan, half-way down to his aquiline nose,
the luminous edge of which shone like a little crescent moon.

“This is why,” continued the procureur, “I have left all my property,
movable, or immovable, comprised in the above enumerations, to M. le
Vicomte Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne, son of M. le Comte de la
Fere, to console him for the grief he seems to suffer, and enable him to
add more luster to his already glorious name.”

A vague murmur ran through the auditory. The procureur continued,
seconded by the flashing eye of D’Artagnan, which, glancing over the
assembly, quickly restored the interrupted silence:

“On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do give to M. le
Chevalier d’Artagnan, captain of the king’s musketeers, whatever the
said Chevalier d’Artagnan may demand of my property. On condition that
M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do pay a good pension to M. le Chevalier
d’Herblay, my friend, if he should need it in exile. I leave to my
intendant Mousqueton all of my clothes, of city, war, or chase, to the
number of forty-seven suits, in the assurance that he will wear them
till they are worn out, for the love of and in remembrance of his
master. Moreover, I bequeath to M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne my old
servant and faithful friend Mousqueton, already named, providing that
the said vicomte shall so act that Mousqueton shall declare, when dying,
he has never ceased to be happy.”

On hearing these words, Mousqueton bowed, pale and trembling; his
shoulders shook convulsively; his countenance, compressed by a frightful
grief, appeared from between his icy hands, and the spectators saw him
stagger and hesitate, as if, though wishing to leave the hall, he did
not know the way.

“Mousqueton, my good friend,” said D’Artagnan, “go and make your
preparations. I will take you with me to Athos’s house, whither I shall
go on leaving Pierrefonds.”

Mousqueton made no reply. He scarcely breathed, as if everything in that
hall would from that time be foreign. He opened the door, and slowly
disappeared.

The procureur finished his reading, after which the greater part
of those who had come to hear the last will of Porthos dispersed by
degrees, many disappointed, but all penetrated with respect. As
for D’Artagnan, thus left alone, after having received the formal
compliments of the procureur, he was lost in admiration of the wisdom of
the testator, who had so judiciously bestowed his wealth upon the most
necessitous and the most worthy, with a delicacy that neither nobleman
nor courtier could have displayed more kindly. When Porthos enjoined
Raoul de Bragelonne to give D’Artagnan all that he would ask, he knew
well, our worthy Porthos, that D’Artagnan would ask or take nothing; and
in case he did demand anything, none but himself could say what. Porthos
left a pension to Aramis, who, if he should be inclined to ask too much,
was checked by the example of D’Artagnan; and that word _exile_, thrown
out by the testator, without apparent intention, was it not the mildest,
most exquisite criticism upon that conduct of Aramis which had brought
about the death of Porthos? But there was no mention of Athos in the
testament of the dead. Could the latter for a moment suppose that the
son would not offer the best part to the father? The rough mind of
Porthos had fathomed all these causes, seized all these shades more
clearly than law, better than custom, with more propriety than taste.

“Porthos had indeed a heart,” said D’Artagnan to himself with a sigh.
As he made this reflection, he fancied he hard a groan in the room above
him; and he thought immediately of poor Mousqueton, whom he felt it was
a pleasing duty to divert from his grief. For this purpose he left the
hall hastily to seek the worthy intendant, as he had not returned. He
ascended the staircase leading to the first story, and perceived, in
Porthos’s own chamber, a heap of clothes of all colors and materials,
upon which Mousqueton had laid himself down after heaping them all on
the floor together. It was the legacy of the faithful friend. Those
clothes were truly his own; they had been given to him; the hand of
Mousqueton was stretched over these relics, which he was kissing with
his lips, with all his face, and covered with his body. D’Artagnan
approached to console the poor fellow.

“My God!” said he, “he does not stir--he has fainted!”

But D’Artagnan was mistaken. Mousqueton was dead! Dead, like the dog
who, having lost his master, crawls back to die upon his cloak.



CHAPTER LVI.
The Old Age of Athos.

While these affairs were separating forever the four musketeers,
formerly bound together in a manner that seemed indissoluble, Athos,
left alone after the departure of Raoul, began to pay his tribute to
that foretaste of death which is called the absence of those we love.
Back in his house at Blois, no longer having even Grimaud to receive
a poor smile as he passed through the parterre, Athos daily felt
the decline of vigor of a nature which for so long a time had seemed
impregnable. Age, which had been kept back by the presence of the
beloved object, arrived with that _cortege_ of pains and inconveniences,
which grows by geometrical accretion. Athos had no longer his son to
induce him to walk firmly, with head erect, as a good example; he had no
longer, in those brilliant eyes of the young man, an ever-ardent focus
at which to kindle anew the fire of his looks. And then, must it be
said, that nature, exquisite in tenderness and reserve, no longer
finding anything to understand its feelings, gave itself up to grief
with all the warmth of common natures when they yield to joy. The Comte
de la Fere, who had remained a young man to his sixty-second year;
the warrior who had preserved his strength in spite of fatigue; his
freshness of mind in spite of misfortune, his mild serenity of soul and
body in spite of Milady, in spite of Mazarin, in spite of La Valliere;
Athos had become an old man in a week, from the moment at which he lost
the comfort of his later youth. Still handsome, though bent, noble, but
sad, he sought, since his solitude, the deeper glades where sunshine
scarcely penetrated. He discontinued all the mighty exercises he had
enjoyed through life, when Raoul was no longer with him. The servants,
accustomed to see him stirring with the dawn at all seasons, were
astonished to hear seven o’clock strike before their master quitted his
bed. Athos remained in bed with a book under his pillow--but he did not
sleep, neither did he read. Remaining in bed that he might no longer
have to carry his body, he allowed his soul and spirit to wander from
their envelope and return to his son, or to God.

His people were sometimes terrified to see him, for hours together,
absorbed in silent reverie, mute and insensible; he no longer heard the
timid step of the servant who came to the door of his chamber to watch
the sleeping or waking of his master. It often occurred that he forgot
the day had half passed away, that the hours for the two first meals
were gone by. Then he was awakened. He rose, descended to his shady
walk, then came out a little into the sun, as though to partake of its
warmth for a minute in memory of his absent child. And then the dismal
monotonous walk recommenced, until, exhausted, he regained the chamber
and his bed, his domicile by choice. For several days the comte did not
speak a single word. He refused to receive the visits that were paid
him, and during the night he was seen to relight his lamp and pass long
hours in writing, or examining parchments.

Athos wrote one of these letters to Vannes, another to Fontainebleau;
they remained without answers. We know why: Aramis had quitted France,
and D’Artagnan was traveling from Nantes to Paris, from Paris to
Pierrefonds. His _valet de chambre_ observed that he shortened his walk
every day by several turns. The great alley of limes soon became too
long for feet that used to traverse it formerly a hundred times a day.
The comte walked feebly as far as the middle trees, seated himself upon
a mossy bank that sloped towards a sidewalk, and there waited the return
of his strength, or rather the return of night. Very shortly a hundred
steps exhausted him. At length Athos refused to rise at all; he declined
all nourishment, and his terrified people, although he did not complain,
although he wore a smile upon his lips, although he continued to speak
with his sweet voice--his people went to Blois in search of the ancient
physician of the late Monsieur, and brought him to the Comte de la Fere
in such a fashion that he could see the comte without being himself
seen. For this purpose, they placed him in a closet adjoining the
chamber of the patient, and implored him not to show himself, for fear
of displeasing their master, who had not asked for a physician. The
doctor obeyed. Athos was a sort of model for the gentlemen of the
country; the Blaisois boasted of possessing this sacred relic of French
glory. Athos was a great seigneur compared with such nobles as the king
improvised by touching with his artificial scepter the patched-up trunks
of the heraldic trees of the province.

People respected Athos, we say, and they loved him. The physician could
not bear to see his people weep, to see flock round him the poor of the
canton, to whom Athos had so often given life and consolation by his
kind words and his charities. He examined, therefore, from the depths
of his hiding-place, the nature of that mysterious malady which bent
and aged more mortally every day a man but lately so full of life and a
desire to live. He remarked upon the cheeks of Athos the hectic hue of
fever, which feeds upon itself; slow fever, pitiless, born in a fold
of the heart, sheltering itself behind that rampart, growing from
the suffering it engenders, at once cause and effect of a perilous
situation. The comte spoke to nobody; he did not even talk to
himself. His thought feared noise; it approached to that degree of
over-excitement which borders upon ecstasy. Man thus absorbed, though he
does not yet belong to God, already appertains no longer to the earth.
The doctor remained for several hours studying this painful struggle of
the will against superior power; he was terrified at seeing those eyes
always fixed, ever directed on some invisible object; was terrified at
the monotonous beating of that heart from which never a sigh arose
to vary the melancholy state; for often pain becomes the hope of the
physician. Half a day passed away thus. The doctor formed his resolution
like a brave man; he issued suddenly from his place of retreat, and went
straight up to Athos, who beheld him without evincing more surprise than
if he had understood nothing of the apparition.

“Monsieur le comte, I crave your pardon,” said the doctor, coming up
to the patient with open arms; “but I have a reproach to make you--you
shall hear me.” And he seated himself by the pillow of Athos, who had
great trouble in rousing himself from his preoccupation.

“What is the matter, doctor?” asked the comte, after a silence.

“The matter is, you are ill, monsieur, and have had no advice.”

“I! ill!” said Athos, smiling.

“Fever, consumption, weakness, decay, monsieur le comte!”

“Weakness!” replied Athos; “is it possible? I do not get up.”

“Come, come! monsieur le comte, no subterfuges; you are a good
Christian?”

“I hope so,” said Athos.

“Is it your wish to kill yourself?”

“Never, doctor.”

“Well! monsieur, you are in a fair way of doing so. Thus to remain is
suicide. Get well! monsieur le comte, get well!”

“Of what? Find the disease first. For my part, I never knew myself
better; never did the sky appear more blue to me; never did I take more
care of my flowers.”

“You have a hidden grief.”

“Concealed!--not at all; the absence of my son, doctor; that is my
malady, and I do not conceal it.”

“Monsieur le comte, your son lives, he is strong, he has all the future
before him--the future of men of merit, of his race; live for him--”

“But I do live, doctor; oh! be satisfied of that,” added he, with a
melancholy smile; “for as long as Raoul lives, it will be plainly known,
for as long as he lives, I shall live.”

“What do you say?”

“A very simple thing. At this moment, doctor, I leave life suspended
within me. A forgetful, dissipated, indifferent life would be beyond my
strength, now I have no longer Raoul with me. You do not ask the lamp
to burn when the match has not illumed the flame; do not ask me to live
amidst noise and merriment. I vegetate, I prepare myself, I wait. Look,
doctor; remember those soldiers we have so often seen together at the
ports, where they were waiting to embark; lying down, indifferent, half
on one element, half on the other; they were neither at the place where
the sea was going to carry them, nor at the place the earth was going
to lose them; baggage prepared, minds on the stretch, arms stacked--they
waited. I repeat it, the word is the one which paints my present life.
Lying down like the soldiers, my ear on the stretch for the report that
may reach me, I wish to be ready to set out at the first summons. Who
will make me that summons? life or death? God or Raoul? My baggage
is packed, my soul is prepared, I await the signal--I wait, doctor, I
wait!”

The doctor knew the temper of that mind; he appreciated the strength
of that body; he reflected for the moment, told himself that words
were useless, remedies absurd, and left the chateau, exhorting Athos’s
servants not to quit him for a moment.

The doctor being gone, Athos evinced neither anger nor vexation at
having been disturbed. He did not even desire that all letters that
came should be brought to him directly. He knew very well that every
distraction which should arise would be a joy, a hope, which his
servants would have paid with their blood to procure him. Sleep had
become rare. By intense thinking, Athos forgot himself, for a few hours
at most, in a reverie most profound, more obscure than other people
would have called a dream. The momentary repose which this forgetfulness
thus gave the body, still further fatigued the soul, for Athos lived a
double life during these wanderings of his understanding. One night,
he dreamt that Raoul was dressing himself in a tent, to go upon an
expedition commanded by M de Beaufort in person. The young man was sad;
he clasped his cuirass slowly, and slowly he girded on his sword.

“What is the matter?” asked his father, tenderly.

“What afflicts me is the death of Porthos, ever so dear a friend,”
 replied Raoul. “I suffer here the grief you soon will feel at home.”

And the vision disappeared with the slumber of Athos. At daybreak one of
his servants entered his master’s apartment, and gave him a letter which
came from Spain.

“The writing of Aramis,” thought the comte; and he read.

“Porthos is dead!” cried he, after the first lines. “Oh! Raoul, Raoul!
thanks! thou keepest thy promise, thou warnest me!”

And Athos, seized with a mortal sweat, fainted in his bed, without any
other cause than weakness.



CHAPTER LVII.
Athos’s Vision.

When this fainting of Athos had ceased, the comte, almost ashamed of
having given way before this superior natural event, dressed himself
and ordered his horse, determined to ride to Blois, to open more certain
correspondences with either Africa, D’Artagnan, or Aramis. In fact, this
letter from Aramis informed the Comte de la Fere of the bad success
of the expedition of Belle-Isle. It gave him sufficient details of the
death of Porthos to move the tender and devoted heart of Athos to its
innermost fibers. Athos wished to go and pay his friend Porthos a last
visit. To render this honor to his companion in arms, he meant to send
to D’Artagnan, to prevail upon him to recommence the painful voyage to
Belle-Isle, to accomplish in his company that sad pilgrimage to the tomb
of the giant he had so much loved, then to return to his dwelling to
obey that secret influence which was conducting him to eternity by a
mysterious road. But scarcely had his joyous servants dressed their
master, whom they saw with pleasure preparing for a journey which might
dissipate his melancholy; scarcely had the comte’s gentlest horse been
saddled and brought to the door, when the father of Raoul felt his
head become confused, his legs give way, and he clearly perceived
the impossibility of going one step further. He ordered himself to be
carried into the sun; they laid him upon his bed of moss where he passed
a full hour before he could recover his spirits. Nothing could be more
natural than this weakness after then inert repose of the latter days.
Athos took a _bouillon_, to give him strength, and bathed his dried
lips in a glassful of the wine he loved the best--that old Anjou wine
mentioned by Porthos in his admirable will. Then, refreshed, free in
mind, he had his horse brought again; but only with the aid of his
servants was he able painfully to climb into the saddle. He did not go a
hundred paces; a shivering seized him again at the turning of the road.

“This is very strange!” said he to his _valet de chambre_, who
accompanied him.

“Let us stop, monsieur--I conjure you!” replied the faithful servant;
“how pale you are getting!”

“That will not prevent my pursuing my route, now I have once started,”
 replied the comte. And he gave his horse his head again. But suddenly,
the animal, instead of obeying the thought of his master, stopped. A
movement, of which Athos was unconscious, had checked the bit.

“Something,” said Athos, “wills that I should go no further. Support
me,” added he, stretching out his arms; “quick! come closer! I feel my
muscles relax--I shall fall from my horse.”

The valet had seen the movement made by his master at the moment he
received the order. He went up to him quickly, received the comte in his
arms, and as they were not yet sufficiently distant from the house
for the servants, who had remained at the door to watch their master’s
departure, not to perceive the disorder in the usually regular
proceeding of the comte, the valet called his comrades by gestures and
voice, and all hastened to his assistance. Athos had gone but a few
steps on his return, when he felt himself better again. His strength
seemed to revive and with it the desire to go to Blois. He made his
horse turn round: but, at the animal’s first steps, he sunk again into a
state of torpor and anguish.

“Well! decidedly,” said he, “it is _willed_ that I should stay at home.”
 His people flocked around him; they lifted him from his horse, and
carried him as quickly as possible into the house. Everything was
prepared in his chamber, and they put him to bed.

“You will be sure to remember,” said he, disposing himself to sleep,
“that I expect letters from Africa this very day.”

“Monsieur will no doubt hear with pleasure that Blaisois’s son is gone
on horseback, to gain an hour over the courier of Blois,” replied his
_valet de chambre_.

“Thank you,” replied Athos, with his placid smile.

The comte fell asleep, but his disturbed slumber resembled torture
rather than repose. The servant who watched him saw several times the
expression of internal suffering shadowed on his features. Perhaps Athos
was dreaming.

The day passed away. Blaisois’s son returned; the courier had brought
no news. The comte reckoned the minutes with despair; he shuddered when
those minutes made an hour. The idea that he was forgotten seized him
once, and brought on a fearful pang of the heart. Everybody in the house
had given up all hopes of the courier--his hour had long passed. Four
times the express sent to Blois had repeated his journey, and there was
nothing to the address of the comte. Athos knew that the courier only
arrived once a week. Here, then, was a delay of eight mortal days to be
endured. He commenced the night in this painful persuasion. All that a
sick man, irritated by suffering, can add of melancholy suppositions to
probabilities already gloomy, Athos heaped up during the early hours of
this dismal night. The fever rose: it invaded the chest, where the fire
soon caught, according to the expression of the physician, who had been
brought back from Blois by Blaisois at his last journey. Soon it gained
the head. The physician made two successive bleedings, which dislodged
it for the time, but left the patient very weak, and without power of
action in anything but his brain. And yet this redoubtable fever had
ceased. It besieged with its last palpitations the tense extremities; it
ended by yielding as midnight struck.

The physician, seeing the incontestable improvement, returned to Blois,
after having ordered some prescriptions, and declared that the comte was
saved. Then commenced for Athos a strange, indefinable state. Free to
think, his mind turned towards Raoul, that beloved son. His imagination
penetrated the fields of Africa in the environs of Gigelli, where M. de
Beaufort must have landed with his army. A waste of gray rocks, rendered
green in certain parts by the waters of the sea, when it lashed the
shore in storms and tempest. Beyond, the shore, strewed over with these
rocks like gravestones, ascended, in form of an amphitheater among
mastic-trees and cactus, a sort of small town, full of smoke, confused
noises, and terrified movements. All of a sudden, from the bosom of
this smoke arose a flame, which succeeded, creeping along the houses,
in covering the entire surface of the town, and increased by degrees,
uniting in its red and angry vortices tears, screams, and supplicating
arms outstretched to Heaven.

There was, for a moment, a frightful _pele-mele_ of timbers falling
to pieces, of swords broken, of stones calcined, trees burnt and
disappearing. It was a strange thing that in this chaos, in which Athos
distinguished raised arms, in which he heard cries, sobs, and groans,
he did not see one human figure. The cannon thundered at a distance,
musketry madly barked, the sea moaned, flocks made their escape,
bounding over the verdant slope. But not a soldier to apply the match
to the batteries of cannon, not a sailor to assist in maneuvering the
fleet, not a shepherd in charge of the flocks. After the ruin of the
village, the destruction of the forts which dominated it, a ruin and
destruction magically wrought without the co-operation of a single human
being, the flames were extinguished, the smoke began to subside, then
diminished in intensity, paled and disappeared entirely. Night then came
over the scene; night dark upon the earth, brilliant in the firmament.
The large blazing stars which spangled the African sky glittered and
gleamed without illuminating anything.

A long silence ensued, which gave, for a moment, repose to the troubled
imagination of Athos; and as he felt that that which he saw was not
terminated, he applied more attentively the eyes of his understanding
on the strange spectacle which his imagination had presented. This
spectacle was soon continued for him. A mild pale moon rose behind the
declivities of the coast, streaking at first the undulating ripples of
the sea, which appeared to have calmed after the roaring it had sent
forth during the vision of Athos--the moon, we say, shed its diamonds
and opals upon the briers and bushes of the hills. The gray rocks, so
many silent and attentive phantoms, appeared to raise their heads to
examine likewise the field of battle by the light of the moon, and Athos
perceived that the field, empty during the combat, was now strewn with
fallen bodies.

An inexpressible shudder of fear and horror seized his soul as he
recognized the white and blue uniforms of the soldiers of Picardy,
with their long pikes and blue handles, and muskets marked with the
_fleur-de-lis_ on the butts. When he saw all the gaping wounds, looking
up to the bright heavens as if to demand back of them the souls to which
they had opened a passage,--when he saw the slaughtered horses, stiff,
their tongues hanging out at one side of their mouths, sleeping in the
shiny blood congealed around them, staining their furniture and their
manes,--when he saw the white horse of M de Beaufort, with his head
beaten to pieces, in the first ranks of the dead, Athos passed a cold
hand over his brow, which he was astonished not to find burning. He was
convinced by this touch that he was present, as a spectator, without
delirium’s dreadful aid, the day after the battle fought upon the shores
of Gigelli by the army of the expedition, which he had seen leave the
coast of France and disappear upon the dim horizon, and of which he had
saluted with thought and gesture the last cannon-shot fired by the duke
as a signal of farewell to his country.

Who can paint the mortal agony with which his soul followed, like a
vigilant eye, these effigies of clay-cold soldiers, and examined them,
one after the other, to see if Raoul slept among them? Who can express
the intoxication of joy with which Athos bowed before God, and thanked
Him for not having seen him he sought with so much fear among the dead?
In fact, fallen in their ranks, stiff, icy, the dead, still recognizable
with ease, seemed to turn with complacency towards the Comte de la Fere,
to be the better seen by him, during his sad review. But yet, he
was astonished, while viewing all these bodies, not to perceive the
survivors. To such a point did the illusion extend, that this vision
was for him a real voyage made by the father into Africa, to obtain more
exact information respecting his son.

Fatigued, therefore, with having traversed seas and continents, he
sought repose under one of the tents sheltered behind a rock, on the
top of which floated the white _fleur-de-lised_ pennon. He looked for
a soldier to conduct him to the tent of M de Beaufort. Then, while his
eye was wandering over the plain, turning on all sides, he saw a white
form appear behind the scented myrtles. This figure was clothed in the
costume of an officer; it held in its hand a broken sword; it advanced
slowly towards Athos, who, stopping short and fixing his eyes upon it,
neither spoke nor moved, but wished to open his arms, because in this
silent officer he had already recognized Raoul. The comte attempted to
utter a cry, but it was stifled in his throat. Raoul, with a gesture,
directed him to be silent, placing his finger on his lips and drawing
back by degrees, without Athos being able to see his legs move. The
comte, still paler than Raoul, followed his son, painfully traversing
briers and bushes, stones and ditches, Raoul not appearing to touch the
earth, no obstacle seeming to impede the lightness of his march.
The comte, whom the inequalities of the path fatigued, soon stopped,
exhausted. Raoul still continued to beckon him to follow him. The tender
father, to whom love restored strength, made a last effort, and climbed
the mountain after the young man, who attracted him by gesture and by
smile.

At length he gained the crest of the hill, and saw, thrown out in black,
upon the horizon whitened by the moon, the aerial form of Raoul.
Athos reached forth his hand to get closer to his beloved son upon the
plateau, and the latter also stretched out his; but suddenly, as if the
young man had been drawn away in his own despite, still retreating, he
left the earth, and Athos saw the clear blue sky shine between the feet
of his child and the ground of the hill. Raoul rose insensibly into the
void, smiling, still calling with gesture:--he departed towards heaven.
Athos uttered a cry of tenderness and terror. He looked below again. He
saw a camp destroyed, and all those white bodies of the royal army, like
so many motionless atoms. And, then, raising his head, he saw the figure
of his son still beckoning him to climb the mystic void.



CHAPTER LVIII.
The Angel of Death.

Athos was at this part of his marvelous vision, when the charm was
suddenly broken by a great noise rising from the outer gates. A horse
was heard galloping over the hard gravel of the great alley, and the
sound of noisy and animated conversations ascended to the chamber in
which the comte was dreaming. Athos did not stir from the place he
occupied; he scarcely turned his head towards the door to ascertain the
sooner what these noises could be. A heavy step ascended the stairs; the
horse, which had recently galloped, departed slowly towards the stables.
Great hesitation appeared in the steps, which by degrees approached the
chamber. A door was opened, and Athos, turning a little towards the part
of the room the noise came from, cried, in a weak voice:

“It is a courier from Africa, is it not?”

“No, monsieur le comte,” replied a voice which made the father of Raoul
start upright in his bed.

“Grimaud!” murmured he. And the sweat began to pour down his face.
Grimaud appeared in the doorway. It was no longer the Grimaud we have
seen, still young with courage and devotion, when he jumped the first
into the boat destined to convey Raoul de Bragelonne to the vessels of
the royal fleet. ‘Twas now a stern and pale old man, his clothes covered
with dust, and hair whitened by old age. He trembled whilst leaning
against the door-frame, and was near falling on seeing, by the light of
the lamps, the countenance of his master. These two men who had lived so
long together in a community of intelligence, and whose eyes, accustomed
to economize expressions, knew how to say so many things silently--these
two old friends, one as noble as the other in heart, if they were
unequal in fortune and birth, remained tongue-tied whilst looking at
each other. By the exchange of a single glance they had just read to
the bottom of each other’s hearts. The old servitor bore upon his
countenance the impression of a grief already old, the outward token of
a grim familiarity with woe. He appeared to have no longer in use more
than a single version of his thoughts. As formerly he was accustomed not
to speak much, he was now accustomed not to smile at all. Athos read at
a glance all these shades upon the visage of his faithful servant, and
in the same tone he would have employed to speak to Raoul in his dream:

“Grimaud,” said he, “Raoul is dead. _Is it not so?_”

Behind Grimaud the other servants listened breathlessly, with their
eyes fixed upon the bed of their sick master. They heard the terrible
question, and a heart-breaking silence followed.

“Yes,” replied the old man, heaving the monosyllable from his chest with
a hoarse, broken sigh.

Then arose voices of lamentation, which groaned without measure, and
filled with regrets and prayers the chamber where the agonized father
sought with his eyes the portrait of his son. This was for Athos like
the transition which led to his dream. Without uttering a cry, without
shedding a tear, patient, mild, resigned as a martyr, he raised his eyes
towards Heaven, in order there to see again, rising above the mountain
of Gigelli, the beloved shade that was leaving him at the moment of
Grimaud’s arrival. Without doubt, while looking towards the heavens,
resuming his marvelous dream, he repassed by the same road by which the
vision, at once so terrible and sweet, had led him before; for after
having gently closed his eyes, he reopened them and began to smile: he
had just seen Raoul, who had smiled upon him. With his hands joined upon
his breast, his face turned towards the window, bathed by the fresh air
of night, which brought upon its wings the aroma of the flowers and
the woods, Athos entered, never again to come out of it, into the
contemplation of that paradise which the living never see. God willed,
no doubt, to open to this elect the treasures of eternal beatitude,
at this hour when other men tremble with the idea of being severely
received by the Lord, and cling to this life they know, in the dread of
the other life of which they get but merest glimpses by the dismal murky
torch of death. Athos was spirit-guided by the pure serene soul of his
son, which aspired to be like the paternal soul. Everything for this
just man was melody and perfume in the rough road souls take to return
to the celestial country. After an hour of this ecstasy, Athos softly
raised his hands as white as wax; the smile did not quit his lips, and
he murmured low, so low as scarcely to be audible, these three words
addressed to God or to Raoul:

“HERE I AM!”

And his hands fell slowly, as though he himself had laid them on the
bed.

Death had been kind and mild to this noble creature. It had spared him
the tortures of the agony, convulsions of the last departure; had opened
with an indulgent finger the gates of eternity to that noble soul. God
had no doubt ordered it thus that the pious remembrance of this death
should remain in the hearts of those present, and in the memory of other
men--a death which caused to be loved the passage from this life to the
other by those whose existence upon this earth leads them not to dread
the last judgment. Athos preserved, even in the eternal sleep, that
placid and sincere smile--an ornament which was to accompany him to the
tomb. The quietude and calm of his fine features made his servants for
a long time doubt whether he had really quitted life. The comte’s people
wished to remove Grimaud, who, from a distance, devoured the face now
quickly growing marble-pale, and did not approach, from pious fear of
bringing to him the breath of death. But Grimaud, fatigued as he was,
refused to leave the room. He sat himself down upon the threshold,
watching his master with the vigilance of a sentinel, jealous to receive
either his first waking look or his last dying sigh. The noises all were
quiet in the house--every one respected the slumber of their lord. But
Grimaud, by anxiously listening, perceived that the comte no longer
breathed. He raised himself with his hands leaning on the ground, looked
to see if there did not appear some motion in the body of his master.
Nothing! Fear seized him; he rose completely up, and, at the very
moment, heard some one coming up the stairs. A noise of spurs knocking
against a sword--a warlike sound familiar to his ears--stopped him as he
was going towards the bed of Athos. A voice more sonorous than brass or
steel resounded within three paces of him.

“Athos! Athos! my friend!” cried this voice, agitated even to tears.

“Monsieur le Chevalier d’Artagnan,” faltered out Grimaud.

“Where is he? Where is he?” continued the musketeer. Grimaud seized
his arm in his bony fingers, and pointed to the bed, upon the sheets of
which the livid tints of death already showed.

A choked respiration, the opposite to a sharp cry, swelled the throat of
D’Artagnan. He advanced on tip-toe, trembling, frightened at the noise
his feet made on the floor, his heart rent by a nameless agony. He
placed his ear to the breast of Athos, his face to the comte’s mouth.
Neither noise, nor breath! D’Artagnan drew back. Grimaud, who had
followed him with his eyes, and for whom each of his movements had been
a revelation, came timidly; seated himself at the foot of the bed, and
glued his lips to the sheet which was raised by the stiffened feet of
his master. Then large drops began to flow from his red eyes. This old
man in invincible despair, who wept, bent doubled without uttering a
word, presented the most touching spectacle that D’Artagnan, in a life
so filled with emotion, had ever met with.

The captain resumed standing in contemplation before that smiling dead
man, who seemed to have burnished his last thought, to give his best
friend, the man he had loved next to Raoul, a gracious welcome even
beyond life. And for reply to that exalted flattery of hospitality,
D’Artagnan went and kissed Athos fervently on the brow, and with his
trembling fingers closed his eyes. Then he seated himself by the pillow
without dread of that dead man, who had been so kind and affectionate
to him for five and thirty years. He was feeding his soul with the
remembrances the noble visage of the comte brought to his mind in
crowds--some blooming and charming as that smile--some dark, dismal, and
icy as that visage with its eyes now closed to all eternity.

All at once the bitter flood which mounted from minute to minute invaded
his heart, and swelled his breast almost to bursting. Incapable of
mastering his emotion, he arose, and tearing himself violently from the
chamber where he had just found dead him to whom he came to report the
news of the death of Porthos, he uttered sobs so heart-rending that the
servants, who seemed only to wait for an explosion of grief, answered to
it by their lugubrious clamors, and the dogs of the late comte by their
lamentable howlings. Grimaud was the only one who did not lift up his
voice. Even in the paroxysm of his grief he would not have dared to
profane the dead, or for the first time disturb the slumber of his
master. Had not Athos always bidden him be dumb?

At daybreak D’Artagnan, who had wandered about the lower hall, biting
his fingers to stifle his sighs--D’Artagnan went up once more; and
watching the moments when Grimaud turned his head towards him, he made
him a sign to come to him, which the faithful servant obeyed without
making more noise than a shadow. D’Artagnan went down again, followed
by Grimaud; and when he had gained the vestibule, taking the old man’s
hands, “Grimaud,” said he, “I have seen how the father died; now let me
know about the son.”

Grimaud drew from his breast a large letter, upon the envelope of which
was traced the address of Athos. He recognized the writing of M. de
Beaufort, broke the seal, and began to read, while walking about in the
first steel-chill rays of dawn, in the dark alley of old limes, marked
by the still visible footsteps of the comte who had just died.



CHAPTER LIX.
The Bulletin.

The Duc de Beaufort wrote to Athos. The letter destined for the living
only reached the dead. God had changed the address.

“MY DEAR COMTE,” wrote the prince, in his large, school-boy’s hand,--“a
great misfortune has struck us amidst a great triumph. The king
loses one of the bravest of soldiers. I lose a friend. You lose M. de
Bragelonne. He has died gloriously, so gloriously that I have not the
strength to weep as I could wish. Receive my sad compliments, my dear
comte. Heaven distributes trials according to the greatness of our
hearts. This is an immense one, but not above your courage. Your good
friend,

“LE DUC DE BEAUFORT.”


The letter contained a relation written by one of the prince’s
secretaries. It was the most touching recital, and the most true,
of that dismal episode which unraveled two existences. D’Artagnan,
accustomed to battle emotions, and with a heart armed against
tenderness, could not help starting on reading the name of Raoul, the
name of that beloved boy who had become a shade now--like his father.

“In the morning,” said the prince’s secretary, “monseigneur commanded
the attack. Normandy and Picardy had taken positions in the rocks
dominated by the heights of the mountain, upon the declivity of which
were raised the bastions of Gigelli.

“The cannon opened the action; the regiments marched full of resolution;
the pikemen with pikes elevated, the musket-bearers with their weapons
ready. The prince followed attentively the march and movements of the
troops, so as to be able to sustain them with a strong reserve. With
monseigneur were the oldest captains and his aides-de-camp. M. le
Vicomte de Bragelonne had received orders not to leave his highness. In
the meantime the enemy’s cannon, which at first thundered with little
success against the masses, began to regulate their fire, and the balls,
better directed, killed several men near the prince. The regiments
formed in column, and, advancing against the ramparts, were rather
roughly handled. There was a sort of hesitation in our troops, who found
themselves ill-seconded by the artillery. In fact, the batteries which
had been established the evening before had but a weak and uncertain
aim, on account of their position. The upward direction of the aim
lessened the justness of the shots as well as their range.

“Monseigneur, comprehending the bad effect of this position on the siege
artillery, commanded the frigates moored in the little road to commence
a regular fire against the place. M. de Bragelonne offered himself at
once to carry this order. But monseigneur refused to acquiesce in the
vicomte’s request. Monseigneur was right, for he loved and wished to
spare the young nobleman. He was quite right, and the event took upon
itself to justify his foresight and refusal; for scarcely had the
sergeant charged with the message solicited by M. de Bragelonne gained
the seashore, when two shots from long carbines issued from the enemy’s
ranks and laid him low. The sergeant fell, dyeing the sand with his
blood; observing which, M. de Bragelonne smiled at monseigneur, who said
to him, ‘You see, vicomte, I have saved your life. Report that, some
day, to M. le Comte de la Fere, in order that, learning it from you, he
may thank me.’ The young nobleman smiled sadly, and replied to the duke,
‘It is true, monseigneur, that but for your kindness I should have been
killed, where the poor sergeant has fallen, and should be at rest.’ M.
de Bragelonne made this reply in such a tone that monseigneur answered
him warmly, ‘_Vrai Dieu!_ Young man, one would say that your mouth
waters for death; but, by the soul of Henry IV., I have promised your
father to bring you back alive; and, please the Lord, I mean to keep my
word.’

“Monseigneur de Bragelonne colored, and replied, in a lower voice,
‘Monseigneur, pardon me, I beseech you. I have always had a desire
to meet good opportunities; and it is so delightful to distinguish
ourselves before our general, particularly when that general is M. le
Duc de Beaufort.’

“Monseigneur was a little softened by this; and, turning to the officers
who surrounded him, gave different orders. The grenadiers of the two
regiments got near enough to the ditches and intrenchments to launch
their grenades, which had but small effect. In the meanwhile, M.
d’Estrees, who commanded the fleet, having seen the attempt of the
sergeant to approach the vessels, understood that he must act without
orders, and opened fire. Then the Arabs, finding themselves seriously
injured by the balls from the fleet, and beholding the destruction and
the ruin of their walls, uttered the most fearful cries. Their horsemen
descended the mountain at a gallop, bent over their saddles, and rushed
full tilt upon the columns of infantry, which, crossing their pikes,
stopped this mad assault. Repulsed by the firm attitude of the
battalion, the Arabs threw themselves with fury towards the
_etat-major_, which was not on its guard at that moment.

“The danger was great; monseigneur drew his sword; his secretaries and
people imitated him; the officers of the suite engaged in combat with
the furious Arabs. It was then M. de Bragelonne was able to satisfy the
inclination he had so clearly shown from the commencement of the action.
He fought near the prince with the valor of a Roman, and killed three
Arabs with his small sword. But it was evident that his bravery did not
arise from that sentiment of pride so natural to all who fight. It was
impetuous, affected, even forced; he sought to glut, intoxicate himself
with strife and carnage. He excited himself to such a degree that
monseigneur called to him to stop. He must have heard the voice of
monseigneur, because we who were close to him heard it. He did not,
however, stop, but continued his course to the intrenchments. As M.
de Bragelonne was a well-disciplined officer, this disobedience to the
orders of monseigneur very much surprised everybody, and M de Beaufort
redoubled his earnestness, crying, ‘Stop, Bragelonne! Where are you
going? Stop,’ repeated monseigneur, ‘I command you!’

“We all, imitating the gesture of M. le duc, we all raised our hands.
We expected that the cavalier would turn bridle; but M. de Bragelonne
continued to ride towards the palisades.

“‘Stop, Bragelonne!’ repeated the prince, in a very loud voice, ‘stop!
in the name of your father!’

“At these words M. de Bragelonne turned round; his countenance expressed
a lively grief, but he did not stop; we then concluded that his horse
must have run away with him. When M. le duc saw cause to conclude that
the vicomte was no longer master of his horse, and had watched him
precede the first grenadiers, his highness cried, ‘Musketeers, kill
his horse! A hundred pistoles for the man who kills his horse!’ But who
could expect to hit the beast without at least wounding his rider?
No one dared the attempt. At length one presented himself; he was a
sharp-shooter of the regiment of Picardy, named Luzerne, who took aim
at the animal, fired, and hit him in the quarters, for we saw the blood
redden the hair of the horse. Instead of falling, the cursed jennet was
irritated, and carried him on more furiously than ever. Every Picard who
saw this unfortunate young man rushing on to meet certain death,
shouted in the loudest manner, ‘Throw yourself off, monsieur le
vicomte!--off!--off! throw yourself off!’ M. de Bragelonne was an
officer much beloved in the army. Already had the vicomte arrived within
pistol-shot of the ramparts, when a discharge was poured upon him
that enshrouded him in fire and smoke. We lost sight of him; the smoke
dispersed; he was on foot, upright; his horse was killed.

“The vicomte was summoned to surrender by the Arabs, but he made them
a negative sign with his head, and continued to march towards the
palisades. This was a mortal imprudence. Nevertheless the entire army
was pleased that he would not retreat, since ill-chance had led him
so near. He marched a few paces further, and the two regiments clapped
their hands. It was at this moment the second discharge shook the walls,
and the Vicomte de Bragelonne again disappeared in the smoke; but this
time the smoke dispersed in vain; we no longer saw him standing. He was
down, with his head lower than his legs, among the bushes, and the Arabs
began to think of leaving their intrenchments to come and cut off
his head or take his body--as is the custom with the infidels. But
Monseigneur le Duc de Beaufort had followed all this with his eyes, and
the sad spectacle drew from him many painful sighs. He then cried aloud,
seeing the Arabs running like white phantoms among the mastic-trees,
‘Grenadiers! lancers! will you let them take that noble body?’

“Saying these words and waving his sword, he himself rode towards the
enemy. The regiments, rushing in his steps, ran in their turn, uttering
cries as terrible as those of the Arabs were wild.

“The combat commenced over the body of M. de Bragelonne, and with such
inveteracy was it fought that a hundred and sixty Arabs were left
upon the field, by the side of at least fifty of our troops. It was
a lieutenant from Normandy who took the body of the vicomte on his
shoulders and carried it back to the lines. The advantage was, however,
pursued, the regiments took the reserve with them, and the enemy’s
palisades were utterly destroyed. At three o’clock the fire of the Arabs
ceased; the hand-to-hand fight lasted two hours; it was a massacre. At
five o’clock we were victorious at all points; the enemy had abandoned
his positions, and M. le duc ordered the white flag to be planted on the
summit of the little mountain. It was then we had time to think of M. de
Bragelonne, who had eight large wounds in his body, through which almost
all his blood had welled away. Still, however, he had breathed, which
afforded inexpressible joy to monseigneur, who insisted on being
present at the first dressing of the wounds and the consultation of the
surgeons. There were two among them who declared M. de Bragelonne would
live. Monseigneur threw his arms around their necks, and promised them a
thousand louis each if they could save him.

“The vicomte heard these transports of joy, and whether he was in
despair, or whether he suffered much from his wounds, he expressed
by his countenance a contradiction, which gave rise to reflection,
particularly in one of the secretaries when he had heard what follows.
The third surgeon was the brother of Sylvain de Saint-Cosme, the most
learned of them all. He probed the wounds in his turn, and said nothing.
M. de Bragelonne fixed his eyes steadily upon the skillful surgeon,
and seemed to interrogate his every movement. The latter, upon being
questioned by monseigneur, replied that he saw plainly three mortal
wounds out of eight, but so strong was the constitution of the wounded,
so rich was he in youth, and so merciful was the goodness of God, that
perhaps M. de Bragelonne might recover, particularly if he did not
move in the slightest manner. Frere Sylvain added, turning towards his
assistants, ‘Above everything, do not allow him to move, even a finger,
or you will kill him;’ and we all left the tent in very low spirits.
That secretary I have mentioned, on leaving the tent, thought he
perceived a faint and sad smile glide over the lips of M. de Bragelonne
when the duke said to him, in a cheerful, kind voice, ‘We will save you,
vicomte, we will save you yet.’

“In the evening, when it was believed the wounded youth had taken some
repose, one of the assistants entered his tent, but rushed out again
immediately, uttering loud cries. We all ran up in disorder, M. le duc
with us, and the assistant pointed to the body of M. de Bragelonne
upon the ground, at the foot of his bed, bathed in the remainder of his
blood. It appeared that he had suffered some convulsion, some delirium,
and that he had fallen; that the fall had accelerated his end, according
to the prognosis of Frere Sylvain. We raised the vicomte; he was cold
and dead. He held a lock of fair hair in his right hand, and that hand
was tightly pressed upon his heart.”

Then followed the details of the expedition, and of the victory obtained
over the Arabs. D’Artagnan stopped at the account of the death of poor
Raoul. “Oh!” murmured he, “unhappy boy! a suicide!” And turning his
eyes towards the chamber of the chateau, in which Athos slept in eternal
sleep, “They kept their words with each other,” said he, in a low voice;
“now I believe them to be happy; they must be reunited.” And he
returned through the parterre with slow and melancholy steps. All the
village--all the neighborhood--were filled with grieving neighbors
relating to each other the double catastrophe, and making preparations
for the funeral.



CHAPTER LX.
The Last Canto of the Poem.

On the morrow, all the _noblesse_ of the provinces, of the environs, and
wherever messengers had carried the news, might have been seen arriving
in detachments. D’Artagnan had shut himself up, without being willing
to speak to anybody. Two such heavy deaths falling upon the captain,
so closely after the death of Porthos, for a long time oppressed that
spirit which had hitherto been so indefatigable and invulnerable.
Except Grimaud, who entered his chamber once, the musketeer saw neither
servants nor guests. He supposed, from the noises in the house, and the
continual coming and going, that preparations were being made for the
funeral of the comte. He wrote to the king to ask for an extension of
his leave of absence. Grimaud, as we have said, had entered D’Artagnan’s
apartment, had seated himself upon a joint-stool near the door, like a
man who meditates profoundly; then, rising, he made a sign to D’Artagnan
to follow him. The latter obeyed in silence. Grimaud descended to the
comte’s bed-chamber, showed the captain with his finger the place of the
empty bed, and raised his eyes eloquently towards Heaven.

“Yes,” replied D’Artagnan, “yes, good Grimaud--now with the son he loved
so much!”

Grimaud left the chamber, and led the way to the hall, where, according
to the custom of the province, the body was laid out, previously to
being put away forever. D’Artagnan was struck at seeing two open coffins
in the hall. In reply to the mute invitation of Grimaud, he approached,
and saw in one of them Athos, still handsome in death, and, in the
other, Raoul with his eyes closed, his cheeks pearly as those of the
Palls of Virgil, with a smile on his violet lips. He shuddered at seeing
the father and son, those two departed souls, represented on earth by
two silent, melancholy bodies, incapable of touching each other, however
close they might be.

“Raoul here!” murmured he. “Oh! Grimaud, why did you not tell me this?”

Grimaud shook his head, and made no reply; but taking D’Artagnan by
the hand, he led him to the coffin, and showed him, under the thin
winding-sheet, the black wounds by which life had escaped. The captain
turned away his eyes, and, judging it was useless to question Grimaud,
who would not answer, he recollected that M de Beaufort’s secretary had
written more than he, D’Artagnan, had had the courage to read. Taking up
the recital of the affair which had cost Raoul his life, he found these
words, which ended the concluding paragraph of the letter:

“Monseigneur le duc has ordered that the body of monsieur le vicomte
should be embalmed, after the manner practiced by the Arabs when they
wish their dead to be carried to their native land; and monsieur le duc
has appointed relays, so that the same confidential servant who brought
up the young man might take back his remains to M. le Comte de la Fere.”

“And so,” thought D’Artagnan, “I shall follow thy funeral, my dear
boy--I, already old--I, who am of no value on earth--and I shall scatter
dust upon that brow I kissed but two months since. God has willed it to
be so. Thou hast willed it to be so, thyself. I have no longer the right
even to weep. Thou hast chosen death; it seemed to thee a preferable
gift to life.”

At length arrived the moment when the chill remains of these two
gentlemen were to be given back to mother earth. There was such an
affluence of military and other people that up to the place of the
sepulture, which was a little chapel on the plain, the road from the
city was filled with horsemen and pedestrians in mourning. Athos had
chosen for his resting-place the little inclosure of a chapel erected by
himself near the boundary of his estates. He had had the stones, cut
in 1550, brought from an old Gothic manor-house in Berry, which had
sheltered his early youth. The chapel, thus rebuilt, transported, was
pleasing to the eye beneath its leafy curtains of poplars and sycamores.
It was ministered in every Sunday, by the cure of the neighboring bourg,
to whom Athos paid an allowance of two hundred francs for this service;
and all the vassals of his domain, with their families, came thither to
hear mass, without having any occasion to go to the city.

Behind the chapel extended, surrounded by two high hedges of
hazel, elder and white thorn, and a deep ditch, the little
inclosure--uncultivated, though gay in its sterility; because the mosses
there grew thick, wild heliotrope and ravenelles there mingled perfumes,
while from beneath an ancient chestnut issued a crystal spring, a
prisoner in its marble cistern, and on the thyme all around alighted
thousands of bees from the neighboring plants, whilst chaffinches and
redthroats sang cheerfully among the flower-spangled hedges. It was to
this place the somber coffins were carried, attended by a silent and
respectful crowd. The office of the dead being celebrated, the last
adieux paid to the noble departed, the assembly dispersed, talking,
along the roads, of the virtues and mild death of the father, of the
hopes the son had given, and of his melancholy end upon the arid coast
of Africa.

Little by little, all noises were extinguished, like the lamps
illuminating the humble nave. The minister bowed for the last time to
the altar and the still fresh graves; then, followed by his assistant,
he slowly took the road back to the presbytery. D’Artagnan, left alone,
perceived that night was coming on. He had forgotten the hour, thinking
only of the dead. He arose from the oaken bench on which he was seated
in the chapel, and wished, as the priest had done, to go and bid a last
adieu to the double grave which contained his two lost friends.

A woman was praying, kneeling on the moist earth. D’Artagnan stopped at
the door of the chapel, to avoid disturbing her, and also to endeavor to
find out who was the pious friend who performed this sacred duty with
so much zeal and perseverance. The unknown had hidden her face in her
hands, which were white as alabaster. From the noble simplicity of her
costume, she must be a woman of distinction. Outside the inclosure were
several horses mounted by servants; a travelling carriage was in waiting
for this lady. D’Artagnan in vain sought to make out what caused her
delay. She continued praying, and frequently pressed her handkerchief to
her face, by which D’Artagnan perceived she was weeping. He beheld her
strike her breast with the compunction of a Christian woman. He heard
her several times exclaim as from a wounded heart: “Pardon! pardon!” And
as she appeared to abandon herself entirely to her grief, as she threw
herself down, almost fainting, exhausted by complaints and prayers,
D’Artagnan, touched by this love for his so much regretted friends,
made a few steps towards the grave, in order to interrupt the melancholy
colloquy of the penitent with the dead. But as soon as his step sounded
on the gravel, the unknown raised her head, revealing to D’Artagnan a
face aflood with tears, a well-known face. It was Mademoiselle de la
Valliere! “Monsieur d’Artagnan!” murmured she.

“You!” replied the captain, in a stern voice, “you here!--oh! madame, I
should better have liked to see you decked with flowers in the mansion
of the Comte de la Fere. You would have wept less--and they too--and I!”

“Monsieur!” said she, sobbing.

“For it was you,” added this pitiless friend of the dead,--“it was you
who sped these two men to the grave.”

“Oh! spare me!”

“God forbid, madame, that I should offend a woman, or that I should make
her weep in vain; but I must say that the place of the murderer is not
upon the grave of her victims.” She wished to reply.

“What I now tell you,” added he, coldly, “I have already told the king.”

She clasped her hands. “I know,” said she, “I have caused the death of
the Vicomte de Bragelonne.”

“Ah! you know it?”

“The news arrived at court yesterday. I have traveled during the night
forty leagues to come and ask pardon of the comte, whom I supposed to be
still living, and to pray God, on the tomb of Raoul, that he would
send me all the misfortunes I have merited, except a single one. Now,
monsieur, I know that the death of the son has killed the father; I have
two crimes to reproach myself with; I have two punishments to expect
from Heaven.”

“I will repeat to you, mademoiselle,” said D’Artagnan, “what M. de
Bragelonne said of you, at Antibes, when he already meditated death: ‘If
pride and coquetry have misled her, I pardon her while despising her. If
love has produced her error, I pardon her, but I swear that no one could
have loved her as I have done.’”

“You know,” interrupted Louise, “that of my love I was about to
sacrifice myself; you know whether I suffered when you met me lost,
dying, abandoned. Well! never have I suffered so much as now; because
then I hoped, desired,--now I have no longer anything to wish for;
because this death drags all my joy into the tomb; because I can no
longer dare to love without remorse, and I feel that he whom I love--oh!
it is but just!--will repay me with the tortures I have made others
undergo.”

D’Artagnan made no reply; he was too well convinced that she was not
mistaken.

“Well, then,” added she, “dear Monsieur d’Artagnan, do not overwhelm me
to-day, I again implore you! I am like the branch torn from the trunk, I
no longer hold to anything in this world--a current drags me on, I
know not whither. I love madly, even to the point of coming to tell it,
wretch that I am, over the ashes of the dead, and I do not blush for
it--I have no remorse on this account. Such love is a religion. Only, as
hereafter you will see me alone, forgotten, disdained; as you will see
me punished, as I am destined to be punished, spare me in my ephemeral
happiness, leave it to me for a few days, for a few minutes. Now, even
at the moment I am speaking to you, perhaps it no longer exists. My God!
this double murder is perhaps already expiated!”

While she was speaking thus, the sound of voices and of horses drew the
attention of the captain. M. de Saint-Aignan came to seek La
Valliere. “The king,” he said, “is a prey to jealousy and uneasiness.”
 Saint-Aignan did not perceive D’Artagnan, half concealed by the trunk
of a chestnut-tree which shaded the double grave. Louise thanked
Saint-Aignan, and dismissed him with a gesture. He rejoined the party
outside the inclosure.

“You see, madame,” said the captain bitterly to the young woman,--“you
see your happiness still lasts.”

The young woman raised her head with a solemn air. “A day will come,”
 said she, “when you will repent of having so misjudged me. On that day,
it is I who will pray God to forgive you for having been unjust towards
me. Besides, I shall suffer so much that you yourself will be the first
to pity my sufferings. Do not reproach me with my fleeting happiness,
Monsieur d’Artagnan; it costs me dear, and I have not paid all my debt.”
 Saying these words, she again knelt down, softly and affectionately.

“Pardon me the last time, my affianced Raoul!” said she. “I have
broken our chain; we are both destined to die of grief. It is thou who
departest first; fear nothing, I shall follow thee. See, only, that I
have not been base, and that I have come to bid thee this last adieu.
The Lord is my witness, Raoul, that if with my life I could have
redeemed thine, I would have given that life without hesitation. I could
not give my love. Once more, forgive me, dearest, kindest friend.”

She strewed a few sweet flowers on the freshly sodded earth; then,
wiping the tears from her eyes, the heavily stricken lady bowed to
D’Artagnan, and disappeared.

The captain watched the departure of the horses, horsemen, and carriage,
then crossing his arms upon his swelling chest, “When will it be my turn
to depart?” said he, in an agitated voice. “What is there left for
man after youth, love, glory, friendship, strength, and wealth have
disappeared? That rock, under which sleeps Porthos, who possessed all I
have named; this moss, under which repose Athos and Raoul, who possessed
much more!”

He hesitated for a moment, with a dull eye; then, drawing himself up,
“Forward! still forward!” said he. “When it is time, God will tell me,
as he foretold the others.”

He touched the earth, moistened with the evening dew, with the ends
of his fingers, signed himself as if he had been at the _benitier_ in
church, and retook alone--ever alone--the road to Paris.


Epilogue.

Four years after the scene we have just described, two horsemen, well
mounted, traversed Blois early in the morning, for the purpose of
arranging a hawking party the king had arranged to make in that uneven
plain the Loire divides in two, which borders on the one side Meung, on
the other Amboise. These were the keeper of the king’s harriers and the
master of the falcons, personages greatly respected in the time of
Louis XIII., but rather neglected by his successor. The horsemen, having
reconnoitered the ground, were returning, their observations made, when
they perceived certain little groups of soldiers, here and there,
whom the sergeants were placing at distances at the openings of the
inclosures. These were the king’s musketeers. Behind them came, upon a
splendid horse, the captain, known by his richly embroidered uniform.
His hair was gray, his beard turning so. He seemed a little bent,
although sitting and handling his horse gracefully. He was looking about
him watchfully.

“M. d’Artagnan does not get any older,” said the keeper of the harriers
to his colleague the falconer; “with ten years more to carry than either
of us, he has the seat of a young man on horseback.”

“That is true,” replied the falconer. “I don’t see any change in him for
the last twenty years.”

But this officer was mistaken; D’Artagnan in the last four years had
lived a dozen. Age had printed its pitiless claws at each angle of his
eyes; his brow was bald; his hands, formerly brown and nervous, were
getting white, as if the blood had half forgotten them.

D’Artagnan accosted the officers with the shade of affability which
distinguishes superiors, and received in turn for his courtesy two most
respectful bows.

“Ah! what a lucky chance to see you here, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried
the falconer.

“It is rather I who should say that, messieurs,” replied the captain,
“for nowadays, the king makes more frequent use of his musketeers than
of his falcons.”

“Ah! it is not as it was in the good old times,” sighed the falconer.
“Do you remember, Monsieur d’Artagnan, when the late king flew the pie
in the vineyards beyond Beaugence? Ah! _dame!_ you were not the captain
of the musketeers at that time, Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“And you were nothing but under-corporal of the tiercelets,” replied
D’Artagnan, laughing. “Never mind that, it was a good time, seeing
that it is always a good time when we are young. Good day, monsieur the
keeper of the harriers.”

“You do me honor, monsieur le comte,” said the latter. D’Artagnan made
no reply. The title of comte had hardly struck him; D’Artagnan had been
a comte four years.

“Are you not very much fatigued with the long journey you have taken,
monsieur le capitaine?” continued the falconer. “It must be full two
hundred leagues from hence to Pignerol.”

“Two hundred and sixty to go, and as many to return,” said D’Artagnan,
quietly.

“And,” said the falconer, “is _he_ well?”

“Who?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Why, poor M. Fouquet,” continued the falconer, in a low voice. The
keeper of the harriers had prudently withdrawn.

“No,” replied D’Artagnan, “the poor man frets terribly; he cannot
comprehend how imprisonment can be a favor; he says that parliament
absolved him by banishing him, and banishment is, or should be, liberty.
He cannot imagine that they had sworn his death, and that to save his
life from the claws of parliament was to be under too much obligation to
Heaven.”

“Ah! yes; the poor man had a close chance of the scaffold,” replied the
falconer; “it is said that M. Colbert had given orders to the governor
of the Bastile, and that the execution was ordered.”

“Enough!” said D’Artagnan, pensively, and with a view of cutting short
the conversation.

“Yes,” said the keeper of the harriers, drawing towards them, “M.
Fouquet is now at Pignerol; he has richly deserved it. He had the good
fortune to be conducted there by you; he robbed the king sufficiently.”

D’Artagnan launched at the master of the dogs one of his crossest looks,
and said to him, “Monsieur, if any one told me you had eaten your dogs’
meat, not only would I refuse to believe it; but still more, if you were
condemned to the lash or to jail for it, I should pity you and would not
allow people to speak ill of you. And yet, monsieur, honest man as you
may be, I assure you that you are not more so than poor M. Fouquet was.”

After having undergone this sharp rebuke, the keeper of the harriers
hung his head, and allowed the falconer to get two steps in advance of
him nearer to D’Artagnan.

“He is content,” said the falconer, in a low voice, to the musketeer;
“we all know that harriers are in fashion nowadays; if he were a
falconer he would not talk in that way.”

D’Artagnan smiled in a melancholy manner at seeing this great political
question resolved by the discontent of such humble interest. He for a
moment ran over in his mind the glorious existence of the surintendant,
the crumbling of his fortunes, and the melancholy death that awaited
him; and to conclude, “Did M. Fouquet love falconry?” said he.

“Oh, passionately, monsieur!” repeated the falconer, with an accent of
bitter regret and a sigh that was the funeral oration of Fouquet.

D’Artagnan allowed the ill-humor of the one and the regret of the other
to pass, and continued to advance. They could already catch glimpses
of the huntsmen at the issue of the wood, the feathers of the outriders
passing like shooting stars across the clearings, and the white horses
skirting the bosky thickets looking like illuminated apparitions.

“But,” resumed D’Artagnan, “will the sport last long? Pray, give us a
good swift bird, for I am very tired. Is it a heron or a swan?”

“Both, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the falconer; “but you need not be
alarmed; the king is not much of a sportsman; he does not take the field
on his own account, he only wishes to amuse the ladies.”

The words “to amuse the ladies” were so strongly accented they set
D’Artagnan thinking.

“Ah!” said he, looking keenly at the falconer.

The keeper of the harriers smiled, no doubt with a view of making it up
with the musketeer.

“Oh! you may safely laugh,” said D’Artagnan; “I know nothing of current
news; I only arrived yesterday, after a month’s absence. I left the
court mourning the death of the queen-mother. The king was not willing
to take any amusement after receiving the last sigh of Anne of Austria;
but everything comes to an end in this world. Well! then he is no longer
sad? So much the better.”

“And everything begins as well as ends,” said the keeper with a coarse
laugh.

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan, a second time,--he burned to know, but dignity
would not allow him to interrogate people below him,--“there is
something beginning, then, it seems?”

The keeper gave him a significant wink; but D’Artagnan was unwilling to
learn anything from this man.

“Shall we see the king early?” asked he of the falconer.

“At seven o’clock, monsieur, I shall fly the birds.”

“Who comes with the king? How is Madame? How is the queen?”

“Better, monsieur.”

“Has she been ill, then?”

“Monsieur, since the last chagrin she suffered, her majesty has been
unwell.”

“What chagrin? You need not fancy your news is old. I have but just
returned.”

“It appears that the queen, a little neglected since the death of her
mother-in-law, complained to the king, who answered her,--‘Do I not
sleep at home every night, madame? What more do you expect?’”

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan,--“poor woman! She must heartily hate Mademoiselle
de la Valliere.”

“Oh, no! not Mademoiselle de la Valliere,” replied the falconer.

“Who then--” The blast of a hunting-horn interrupted this conversation.
It summoned the dogs and the hawks. The falconer and his companions set
off immediately, leaving D’Artagnan alone in the midst of the suspended
sentence. The king appeared at a distance, surrounded by ladies and
horsemen. All the troop advanced in beautiful order, at a foot’s pace,
the horns of various sorts animating the dogs and horses. There was an
animation in the scene, a mirage of light, of which nothing now can give
an idea, unless it be the fictitious splendor of a theatric spectacle.
D’Artagnan, with an eye a little, just a little, dimmed by age,
distinguished behind the group three carriages. The first was intended
for the queen; it was empty. D’Artagnan, who did not see Mademoiselle de
la Valliere by the king’s side, on looking about for her, saw her in the
second carriage. She was alone with two of her women, who seemed as dull
as their mistress. On the left hand of the king, upon a high-spirited
horse, restrained by a bold and skillful hand, shone a lady of most
dazzling beauty. The king smiled upon her, and she smiled upon the king.
Loud laughter followed every word she uttered.


“I must know that woman,” thought the musketeer; “who can she be?” And
he stooped towards his friend, the falconer, to whom he addressed the
question he had put to himself.

The falconer was about to reply, when the king, perceiving D’Artagnan,
“Ah, comte!” said he, “you are amongst us once more then! Why have I not
seen you?”

“Sire,” replied the captain, “because your majesty was asleep when I
arrived, and not awake when I resumed my duties this morning.”

“Still the same,” said Louis, in a loud voice, denoting satisfaction.
“Take some rest, comte; I command you to do so. You will dine with me
to-day.”

A murmur of admiration surrounded D’Artagnan like a caress. Every one
was eager to salute him. Dining with the king was an honor his majesty
was not so prodigal of as Henry IV. had been. The king passed a few
steps in advance, and D’Artagnan found himself in the midst of a fresh
group, among whom shone Colbert.

“Good-day, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the minister, with marked
affability, “have you had a pleasant journey?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, bowing to the neck of his horse.

“I heard the king invite you to his table for this evening,” continued
the minister; “you will meet an old friend there.”

“An old friend of mine?” asked D’Artagnan, plunging painfully into
the dark waves of the past, which had swallowed up for him so many
friendships and so many hatreds.

“M. le Duc d’Almeda, who is arrived this morning from Spain.”

“The Duc d’Almeda?” said D’Artagnan, reflecting in vain.

“Here!” cried an old man, white as snow, sitting bent in his carriage,
which he caused to be thrown open to make room for the musketeer.

“_Aramis!_” cried D’Artagnan, struck with profound amazement. And he
felt, inert as it was, the thin arm of the old nobleman hanging round
his neck.

Colbert, after having observed them in silence for a few moments, urged
his horse forward, and left the two old friends together.

“And so,” said the musketeer, taking Aramis’s arm, “you, the exile, the
rebel, are again in France?”

“Ah! and I shall dine with you at the king’s table,” said Aramis,
smiling. “Yes, will you not ask yourself what is the use of fidelity
in this world? Stop! let us allow poor La Valliere’s carriage to pass.
Look, how uneasy she is! How her eyes, dim with tears, follow the king,
who is riding on horseback yonder!”

“With whom?”

“With Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, now Madame de Montespan,” replied
Aramis.

“She is jealous. Is she then deserted?”

“Not quite yet, but it will not be long before she _is_.”

They chatted together, while following the sport, and Aramis’s coachman
drove them so cleverly that they arrived at the instant when the falcon,
attacking the bird, beat him down, and fell upon him. The king alighted;
Madame de Montespan followed his example. They were in front of an
isolated chapel, concealed by huge trees, already despoiled of their
leaves by the first cutting winds of autumn. Behind this chapel was an
inclosure, closed by a latticed gate. The falcon had beaten down his
prey in the inclosure belonging to this little chapel, and the king was
desirous of going in to take the first feather, according to custom. The
_cortege_ formed a circle round the building and the hedges, too small
to receive so many. D’Artagnan held back Aramis by the arm, as he was
about, like the rest, to alight from his carriage, and in a hoarse,
broken voice, “Do you know, Aramis,” said he, “whither chance has
conducted us?”

“No,” replied the duke.

“Here repose men that we knew well,” said D’Artagnan, greatly agitated.

Aramis, without divining anything, and with a trembling step, penetrated
into the chapel by a little door which D’Artagnan opened for him. “Where
are they buried?” said he.

“There, in the inclosure. There is a cross, you see, beneath yon little
cypress. The tree of grief is planted over their tomb; don’t go to it;
the king is going that way; the heron has fallen just there.”

Aramis stopped, and concealed himself in the shade. They then saw,
without being seen, the pale face of La Valliere, who, neglected in her
carriage, at first looked on, with a melancholy heart, from the door,
and then, carried away by jealousy, advanced into the chapel, whence,
leaning against a pillar, she contemplated the king smiling and making
signs to Madame de Montespan to approach, as there was nothing to be
afraid of. Madame de Montespan complied; she took the hand the king held
out to her, and he, plucking out the first feather from the heron, which
the falconer had strangled, placed it in his beautiful companion’s hat.
She, smiling in her turn, kissed the hand tenderly which made her this
present. The king grew scarlet with vanity and pleasure; he looked at
Madame de Montespan with all the fire of new love.

“What will you give me in exchange?” said he.

She broke off a little branch of cypress and offered it to the king, who
looked intoxicated with hope.

“Humph!” said Aramis to D’Artagnan; “the present is but a sad one, for
that cypress shades a tomb.”

“Yes, and the tomb is that of Raoul de Bragelonne,” said D’Artagnan
aloud; “of Raoul, who sleeps under that cross with his father.”

A groan resounded--they saw a woman fall fainting to the ground.
Mademoiselle de la Valliere had seen all, heard all.

“Poor woman!” muttered D’Artagnan, as he helped the attendants to carry
back to her carriage the lonely lady whose lot henceforth in life was
suffering.

That evening D’Artagnan was seated at the king’s table, near M. Colbert
and M. le Duc d’Almeda. The king was very gay. He paid a thousand little
attentions to the queen, a thousand kindnesses to Madame, seated at his
left hand, and very sad. It might have been supposed that time of calm
when the king was wont to watch his mother’s eyes for the approval or
disapproval of what he had just done.

Of mistresses there was no question at this dinner. The king addressed
Aramis two or three times, calling him M. l’ambassadeur, which increased
the surprise already felt by D’Artagnan at seeing his friend the rebel
so marvelously well received at court.

The king, on rising from table, gave his hand to the queen, and made
a sign to Colbert, whose eye was on his master’s face. Colbert took
D’Artagnan and Aramis on one side. The king began to chat with his
sister, whilst Monsieur, very uneasy, entertained the queen with a
preoccupied air, without ceasing to watch his wife and brother from
the corner of his eye. The conversation between Aramis, D’Artagnan,
and Colbert turned upon indifferent subjects. They spoke of preceding
ministers; Colbert related the successful tricks of Mazarin, and desired
those of Richelieu to be related to him. D’Artagnan could not overcome
his surprise at finding this man, with his heavy eyebrows and low
forehead, display so much sound knowledge and cheerful spirits. Aramis
was astonished at that lightness of character which permitted this
serious man to retard with advantage the moment for more important
conversation, to which nobody made any allusion, although all
three interlocutors felt its imminence. It was very plain, from the
embarrassed appearance of Monsieur, how much the conversation of the
king and Madame annoyed him. Madame’s eyes were almost red: was she
going to complain? Was she going to expose a little scandal in open
court? The king took her on one side, and in a tone so tender that
it must have reminded the princess of the time when she was loved for
herself:

“Sister,” said he, “why do I see tears in those lovely eyes?”

“Why--sire--” said she.

“Monsieur is jealous, is he not, sister?”

She looked towards Monsieur, an infallible sign that they were talking
about him.

“Yes,” said she.

“Listen to me,” said the king; “if your friends compromise you, it is
not Monsieur’s fault.”

He spoke these words with so much kindness that Madame, encouraged,
having borne so many solitary griefs so long, was nearly bursting into
tears, so full was her heart.

“Come, come, dear little sister,” said the king, “tell me your griefs;
on the word of a brother, I pity them; on the word of a king, I will put
an end to them.”

She raised her glorious eyes and, in a melancholy tone:

“It is not my friends who compromise me,” said she; “they are either
absent or concealed; they have been brought into disgrace with your
majesty; they, so devoted, so good, so loyal!”

“You say this on account of De Guiche, whom I have exiled, at Monsieur’s
desire?”

“And who, since that unjust exile, has endeavored to get himself killed
once every day.”

“Unjust, say you, sister?”

“So unjust, that if I had not had the respect mixed with friendship that
I have always entertained for your majesty--”

“Well!”

“Well! I would have asked my brother Charles, upon whom I can always--”

The king started. “What, then?”

“I would have asked him to have had it represented to you that Monsieur
and his favorite M. le Chevalier de Lorraine ought not with impunity to
constitute themselves the executioners of my honor and my happiness.”

“The Chevalier de Lorraine,” said the king; “that dismal fellow?”

“Is my mortal enemy. Whilst that man lives in my household, where
Monsieur retains him and delegates his power to him, I shall be the most
miserable woman in the kingdom.”

“So,” said the king, slowly, “you call your brother of England a better
friend than I am?”

“Actions speak for themselves, sire.”

“And you would prefer going to ask assistance there--”

“To my own country!” said she with pride; “yes, sire.”

“You are the grandchild of Henry IV. as well as myself, lady. Cousin
and brother-in-law, does not that amount pretty well to the title of
brother-germain?”

“Then,” said Henrietta, “act!”

“Let us form an alliance.”

“Begin.”

“I have, you say, unjustly exiled De Guiche.”

“Oh! yes,” said she, blushing.

“De Guiche shall return.”

“So far, well.”

“And now you say that I do wrong in having in your household the
Chevalier de Lorraine, who gives Monsieur ill advice respecting you?”

“Remember well what I tell you, sire; the Chevalier de Lorraine some
day--Observe, if ever I come to a dreadful end, I beforehand accuse the
Chevalier de Lorraine; he has a spirit that is capable of any crime!”

“The Chevalier de Lorraine shall no longer annoy you--I promise you
that.”

“Then that will be a true preliminary of alliance, sire,--I sign; but
since you have done your part, tell me what shall be mine.”

“Instead of embroiling me with your brother Charles, you must make him a
more intimate friend than ever.”

“That is very easy.”

“Oh! not quite so easy as you may suppose, for in ordinary friendship
people embrace or exercise hospitality, and that only costs a kiss or a
return, profitable expenses; but in political friendship--”

“Ah! it’s a political friendship, is it?”

“Yes, my sister; and then, instead of embraces and feasts, it is
soldiers--it is soldiers all alive and well equipped--that we must serve
up to our friends; vessels we must offer, all armed with cannons and
stored with provisions. It hence results that we have not always coffers
in a fit condition for such friendships.”

“Ah! you are quite right,” said Madame; “the coffers of the king of
England have been sonorous for some time.”

“But you, my sister, who have so much influence over your brother, you
can secure more than an ambassador could ever get the promise of.”

“To effect that I must go to London, my dear brother.”

“I have thought so,” replied the king, eagerly; “and I have said to
myself that such a voyage would do your health and spirits good.”

“Only,” interrupted Madame, “it is possible I should fail. The king of
England has dangerous counselors.”

“Counselors, do you say?”

“Precisely. If, by chance, your majesty had any intention--I am only
supposing so--of asking Charles II. his alliance in a war--”

“A war?”

“Yes; well! then the king’s counselors, who are in number
seven--Mademoiselle Stewart, Mademoiselle Wells, Mademoiselle Gwyn,
Miss Orchay, Mademoiselle Zunga, Miss Davies, and the proud Countess of
Castlemaine--will represent to the king that war costs a great deal of
money; that it is better to give balls and suppers at Hampton Court than
to equip ships of the line at Portsmouth and Greenwich.”

“And then your negotiations will fail?”

“Oh! those ladies cause all negotiations to fall through which they
don’t make themselves.”

“Do you know the idea that has struck me, sister?”

“No; inform me what it is.”

“It is that, searching well around you, you might perhaps find a female
counselor to take with you to your brother, whose eloquence might
paralyze the ill-will of the seven others.”

“That is really an idea, sire, and I will search.”

“You will find what you want.”

“I hope so.”

“A pretty ambassadress is necessary; an agreeable face is better than an
ugly one, is it not?”

“Most assuredly.”

“An animated, lively, audacious character.”

“Certainly.”

“Nobility; that is, enough to enable her to approach the king without
awkwardness--not too lofty, so as not to trouble herself about the
dignity of her race.”

“Very true.”

“And who knows a little English.”

“_Mon Dieu!_ why, some one,” cried Madame, “like Mademoiselle de
Keroualle, for instance!”

“Oh! why, yes!” said Louis XIV.; “you have hit the mark,--it is you who
have found, my sister.”

“I will take her; she will have no cause to complain, I suppose.”

“Oh! no, I will name her _seductrice plenipotentiaire_ at once, and will
add a dowry to the title.”

“That is well.”

“I fancy you already on your road, my dear little sister, consoled for
all your griefs.”

“I will go, on two conditions. The first is, that I shall know what I am
negotiating about.”

“That is it. The Dutch, you know, insult me daily in their gazettes, and
by their republican attitude. I do not like republics.”

“That may easily be imagined, sire.”

“I see with pain that these kings of the sea--they call themselves
so--keep trade from France in the Indies, and that their vessels will
soon occupy all the ports of Europe. Such a power is too near me,
sister.”

“They are your allies, nevertheless.”

“That is why they were wrong in having the medal you have heard of
struck; a medal which represents Holland stopping the sun, as Joshua
did, with this legend: _The sun had stopped before me_. There is not
much fraternity in that, _is_ there?”

“I thought you had forgotten that miserable episode?”

“I never forget anything, sister. And if my true friends, such as your
brother Charles, are willing to second me--” The princess remained
pensively silent.

“Listen to me; there is the empire of the seas to be shared,” said
Louis XIV. “For this partition, which England submits to, could I not
represent the second party as well as the Dutch?”

“We have Mademoiselle de Keroualle to treat that question,” replied
Madame.

“Your second condition for going, if you please, sister?”

“The consent of Monsieur, my husband.”

“You shall have it.”

“Then consider me already gone, brother.”

On hearing these words, Louis XIV. turned round towards the corner of
the room in which D’Artagnan, Colbert, and Aramis stood, and made
an affirmative sign to his minister. Colbert then broke in on the
conversation suddenly, and said to Aramis:

“Monsieur l’ambassadeur, shall we talk about business?”

D’Artagnan immediately withdrew, from politeness. He directed his steps
towards the fireplace, within hearing of what the king was about to say
to Monsieur, who, evidently uneasy, had gone to him. The face of the
king was animated. Upon his brow was stamped a strength of will, the
expression of which already met no further contradiction in France, and
was soon to meet no more in Europe.

“Monsieur,” said the king to his brother, “I am not pleased with M. le
Chevalier de Lorraine. You, who do him the honor to protect him, must
advise him to travel for a few months.”

These words fell with the crush of an avalanche upon Monsieur, who
adored his favorite, and concentrated all his affections in him.

“In what has the chevalier been inconsiderate enough to displease your
majesty?” cried he, darting a furious look at Madame.

“I will tell you that when he is gone,” said the king, suavely. “And
also when Madame, here, shall have crossed over into England.”

“Madame! in England!” murmured Monsieur, in amazement.

“In a week, brother,” continued the king, “whilst we will go whither I
will shortly tell you.” And the king turned on his heel, smiling in his
brother’s face, to sweeten, as it were, the bitter draught he had given
him.

During this time Colbert was talking with the Duc d’Almeda.

“Monsieur,” said Colbert to Aramis, “this is the moment for us to come
to an understanding. I have made your peace with the king, and I owed
that clearly to a man of so much merit; but as you have often expressed
friendship for me, an opportunity presents itself for giving me a proof
of it. You are, besides, more a Frenchman than a Spaniard. Shall we
secure--answer me frankly--the neutrality of Spain, if we undertake
anything against the United Provinces?”

“Monsieur,” replied Aramis, “the interest of Spain is clear. To embroil
Europe with the Provinces would doubtless be our policy, but the king
of France is an ally of the United Provinces. You are not ignorant,
besides, that it would infer a maritime war, and that France is in no
state to undertake this with advantage.”

Colbert, turning round at this moment, saw D’Artagnan who was seeking
some interlocutor, during this “aside” of the king and Monsieur. He
called him, at the same time saying in a low voice to Aramis, “We may
talk openly with D’Artagnan, I suppose?”

“Oh! certainly,” replied the ambassador.

“We were saying, M. d’Almeda and I,” said Colbert, “that a conflict with
the United Provinces would mean a maritime war.”

“That’s evident enough,” replied the musketeer.

“And what do you think of it, Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“I think that to carry on such a war successfully, you must have very
large land forces.”

“What did you say?” said Colbert, thinking he had ill understood him.

“Why such a large land army?” said Aramis.

“Because the king will be beaten by sea if he has not the English with
him, and that when beaten by sea, he will soon be invaded, either by the
Dutch in his ports, or by the Spaniards by land.”

“And Spain neutral?” asked Aramis.

“Neutral as long as the king shall prove stronger,” rejoined D’Artagnan.

Colbert admired that sagacity which never touched a question without
enlightening it thoroughly. Aramis smiled, as he had long known that in
diplomacy D’Artagnan acknowledged no superior. Colbert, who, like all
proud men, dwelt upon his fantasy with a certainty of success, resumed
the subject, “Who told you, M. d’Artagnan, that the king had no navy?”

“Oh! I take no heed of these details,” replied the captain. “I am but an
indifferent sailor. Like all nervous people, I hate the sea; and yet I
have an idea that, with ships, France being a seaport with two hundred
exits, we might have sailors.”

Colbert drew from his pocket a little oblong book divided into two
columns. On the first were the names of vessels, on the other the
figures recapitulating the number of cannon and men requisite to equip
these ships. “I have had the same idea as you,” said he to
D’Artagnan, “and I have had an account drawn up of the vessels we have
altogether--thirty-five ships.”

“Thirty-five ships! impossible!” cried D’Artagnan.

“Something like two thousand pieces of cannon,” said Colbert. “That is
what the king possesses at this moment. Of five and thirty vessels we
can make three squadrons, but I must have five.”

“Five!” cried Aramis.

“They will be afloat before the end of the year, gentlemen; the king
will have fifty ship of the line. We may venture on a contest with them,
may we not?”

“To build vessels,” said D’Artagnan, “is difficult, but possible. As
to arming them, how is that to be done? In France there are neither
foundries nor military docks.”

“Bah!” replied Colbert, in a bantering tone, “I have planned all
that this year and a half past, did you not know it? Do you know M.
d’Imfreville?”

“D’Imfreville?” replied D’Artagnan; “no.”

“He is a man I have discovered; he has a specialty; he is a man of
genius--he knows how to set men to work. It is he who has cast cannon
and cut the woods of Bourgogne. And then, monsieur l’ambassadeur, you
may not believe what I am going to tell you, but I have a still further
idea.”

“Oh, monsieur!” said Aramis, civilly, “I always believe you.”

“Calculating upon the character of the Dutch, our allies, I said to
myself, ‘They are merchants, they are friendly with the king; they will
be happy to sell to the king what they fabricate for themselves; then
the more we buy’--Ah! I must add this: I have Forant--do you know
Forant, D’Artagnan?”

Colbert, in his warmth, forgot himself; he called the captain simply
_D’Artagnan_, as the king did. But the captain only smiled at it.

“No,” replied he, “I do not know him.”

“That is another man I have discovered, with a genius for buying. This
Forant has purchased for me 350,000 pounds of iron in balls, 200,000
pounds of powder, twelve cargoes of Northern timber, matches, grenades,
pitch, tar--I know not what! with a saving of seven per cent upon what
all those articles would cost me fabricated in France.”

“That is a capital and quaint idea,” replied D’Artagnan, “to have Dutch
cannon-balls cast which will return to the Dutch.”

“Is it not, with loss, too?” And Colbert laughed aloud. He was delighted
with his own joke.

“Still further,” added he, “these same Dutch are building for the king,
at this moment, six vessels after the model of the best of their name.
Destouches--Ah! perhaps you don’t know Destouches?”

“No, monsieur.”

“He is a man who has a sure glance to discern, when a ship is launched,
what are the defects and qualities of that ship--that is valuable,
observe! Nature is truly whimsical. Well, this Destouches appeared to
me to be a man likely to prove useful in marine affairs, and he is
superintending the construction of six vessels of seventy-eight guns,
which the Provinces are building for his majesty. It results from this,
my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan, that the king, if he wished to quarrel with
the Provinces, would have a very pretty fleet. Now, you know better than
anybody else if the land army is efficient.”

D’Artagnan and Aramis looked at each other, wondering at the mysterious
labors this man had undertaken in so short a time. Colbert understood
them, and was touched by this best of flatteries.

“If we, in France, were ignorant of what was going on,” said D’Artagnan,
“out of France still less must be known.”

“That is why I told monsieur l’ambassadeur,” said Colbert, “that, Spain
promising its neutrality, England helping us--”

“If England assists you,” said Aramis, “I promise the neutrality of
Spain.”

“I take you at your word,” Colbert hastened to reply with his blunt
_bonhomie_. “And, _a propos_ of Spain, you have not the ‘Golden Fleece,’
Monsieur d’Almeda. I heard the king say the other day that he should
like to see you wear the _grand cordon_ of St. Michael.”

Aramis bowed. “Oh!” thought D’Artagnan, “and Porthos is no longer here!
What ells of ribbons would there be for him in these _largesses!_ Dear
Porthos!”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” resumed Colbert, “between us two, you will have,
I wager, an inclination to lead your musketeers into Holland. Can you
swim?” And he laughed like a man in high good humor.

“Like an eel,” replied D’Artagnan.

“Ah! but there are some bitter passages of canals and marshes yonder,
Monsieur d’Artagnan, and the best swimmers are sometimes drowned there.”

“It is my profession to die for his majesty,” said the musketeer. “Only,
as it is seldom in war that much water is met with without a little
fire, I declare to you beforehand, that I will do my best to choose
fire. I am getting old; water freezes me--but fire warms, Monsieur
Colbert.”

And D’Artagnan looked so handsome still in quasi-juvenile strength as
he pronounced these words, that Colbert, in his turn, could not help
admiring him. D’Artagnan perceived the effect he had produced. He
remembered that the best tradesman is he who fixes a high price upon his
goods, when they are valuable. He prepared his price in advance.

“So, then,” said Colbert, “we go into Holland?”

“Yes,” replied D’Artagnan; “only--”

“Only?” said M. Colbert.

“Only,” repeated D’Artagnan, “there lurks in everything the question of
interest, the question of self-love. It is a very fine title, that of
captain of the musketeers; but observe this: we have now the king’s
guards and the military household of the king. A captain of musketeers
ought to command all that, and then he would absorb a hundred thousand
livres a year for expenses.”

“Well! but do you suppose the king would haggle with you?” said Colbert.

“Eh! monsieur, you have not understood me,” replied D’Artagnan, sure of
carrying his point. “I was telling you that I, an old captain, formerly
chief of the king’s guard, having precedence of the _marechaux_ of
France--I saw myself one day in the trenches with two other equals, the
captain of the guards and the colonel commanding the Swiss. Now, at no
price will I suffer that. I have old habits, and I will stand or fall by
them.”

Colbert felt this blow, but he was prepared for it.

“I have been thinking of what you said just now,” replied he.

“About what, monsieur?”

“We were speaking of canals and marshes in which people are drowned.”

“Well!”

“Well! if they are drowned, it is for want of a boat, a plank, or a
stick.”

“Of a stick, however short it may be,” said D’Artagnan.

“Exactly,” said Colbert. “And, therefore, I never heard of an instance
of a _marechal_ of France being drowned.”

D’Artagnan became very pale with joy, and in a not very firm voice,
“People would be very proud of me in my country,” said he, “if I were
a _marechal_ of France; but a man must have commanded an expedition in
chief to obtain the _baton_.”

“Monsieur!” said Colbert, “here is in this pocket-book which you will
study, a plan of campaign you will have to lead a body of troops to
carry out in the next spring.”

D’Artagnan took the book, tremblingly, and his fingers meeting those of
Colbert, the minister pressed the hand of the musketeer loyally.

“Monsieur,” said he, “we had both a revenge to take, one over the other.
I have begun; it is now your turn!”

“I will do you justice, monsieur,” replied D’Artagnan, “and implore you
to tell the king that the first opportunity that shall offer, he may
depend upon a victory, or to behold me dead--_or both_.”

“Then I will have the _fleurs-de-lis_ for your _marechal’s baton_
prepared immediately,” said Colbert.

On the morrow, Aramis, who was setting out for Madrid, to negotiate the
neutrality of Spain, came to embrace D’Artagnan at his hotel.

“Let us love each other for four,” said D’Artagnan. “We are now but
two.”

“And you will, perhaps, never see me again, dear D’Artagnan,” said
Aramis; “if you knew how I have loved you! I am old, I am extinct--ah, I
am almost dead.”

“My friend,” said D’Artagnan, “you will live longer than I shall:
diplomacy commands you to live; but, for my part, honor condemns me to
die.”

“Bah! such men as we are, monsieur le marechal,” said Aramis, “only die
satisfied with joy in glory.”

“Ah!” replied D’Artagnan, with a melancholy smile, “I assure you,
monsieur le duc, I feel very little appetite for either.”

They once more embraced, and, two hours after, separated--forever.


The Death of D’Artagnan.

Contrary to that which generally happens, whether in politics or morals,
each kept his promises, and did honor to his engagements.

The king recalled M. de Guiche, and banished M. le Chevalier de
Lorraine; so that Monsieur became ill in consequence. Madame set out
for London, where she applied herself so earnestly to make her brother,
Charles II., acquire a taste for the political counsels of Mademoiselle
de Keroualle, that the alliance between England and France was signed,
and the English vessels, ballasted by a few millions of French gold,
made a terrible campaign against the fleets of the United Provinces.
Charles II. had promised Mademoiselle de Keroualle a little gratitude
for her good counsels; he made her Duchess of Portsmouth. Colbert had
promised the king vessels, munitions, victories. He kept his word, as
is well known. At length Aramis, upon whose promises there was least
dependence to be placed, wrote Colbert the following letter, on the
subject of the negotiations which he had undertaken at Madrid:

“MONSIEUR COLBERT,--I have the honor to expedite to you the R. P. Oliva,
general _ad interim_ of the Society of Jesus, my provisional successor.
The reverend father will explain to you, Monsieur Colbert, that I
preserve to myself the direction of all the affairs of the order which
concern France and Spain; but that I am not willing to retain the title
of general, which would throw too high a side-light on the progress of
the negotiations with which His Catholic Majesty wishes to intrust me. I
shall resume that title by the command of his majesty, when the labors I
have undertaken in concert with you, for the great glory of God and His
Church, shall be brought to a good end. The R. P. Oliva will inform you
likewise, monsieur, of the consent His Catholic Majesty gives to the
signature of a treaty which assures the neutrality of Spain in the event
of a war between France and the United Provinces. This consent will be
valid even if England, instead of being active, should satisfy herself
with remaining neutral. As for Portugal, of which you and I have spoken,
monsieur, I can assure you it will contribute with all its resources to
assist the Most Christian King in his war. I beg you, Monsieur
Colbert, to preserve your friendship and also to believe in my profound
attachment, and to lay my respect at the feet of His Most Christian
Majesty. Signed,

“LE DUC D’ALMEDA.”


Aramis had performed more than he had promised; it remained to be seen
how the king, M. Colbert, and D’Artagnan would be faithful to each
other. In the spring, as Colbert had predicted, the land army entered
on its campaign. It preceded, in magnificent order, the court of Louis
XIV., who, setting out on horseback, surrounded by carriages filled
with ladies and courtiers, conducted the _elite_ of his kingdom to this
sanguinary _fete_. The officers of the army, it is true, had no other
music save the artillery of the Dutch forts; but it was enough for a
great number, who found in this war honor, advancement, fortune--or
death.

M. d’Artagnan set out commanding a body of twelve thousand men, cavalry,
and infantry, with which he was ordered to take the different places
which form knots of that strategic network called La Frise. Never was an
army conducted more gallantly to an expedition. The officers knew that
their leader, prudent and skillful as he was brave, would not sacrifice
a single man, nor yield an inch of ground without necessity. He had
the old habits of war, to live upon the country, keeping his soldiers
singing and the enemy weeping. The captain of the king’s musketeers
well knew his business. Never were opportunities better chosen,
_coups-de-main_ better supported, errors of the besieged more quickly
taken advantage of.

The army commanded by D’Artagnan took twelve small places within a
month. He was engaged in besieging the thirteenth, which had held out
five days. D’Artagnan caused the trenches to be opened without appearing
to suppose that these people would ever allow themselves to be taken.
The pioneers and laborers were, in the army of this man, a body full of
ideas and zeal, because their commander treated them like soldiers, knew
how to render their work glorious, and never allowed them to be killed
if he could help it. It should have been seen with what eagerness the
marshy glebes of Holland were turned over. Those turf-heaps, mounds of
potter’s clay, melted at the word of the soldiers like butter in the
frying-pans of Friesland housewives.

M. d’Artagnan dispatched a courier to the king to give him an account of
the last success, which redoubled the good humor of his majesty and his
inclination to amuse the ladies. These victories of M. d’Artagnan gave
so much majesty to the prince, that Madame de Montespan no longer
called him anything but Louis the Invincible. So that Mademoiselle de
la Valliere, who only called the king Louis the Victorious, lost much
of his majesty’s favor. Besides, her eyes were frequently red, and to an
Invincible nothing is more disagreeable than a mistress who weeps while
everything is smiling round her. The star of Mademoiselle de la Valliere
was being drowned in clouds and tears. But the gayety of Madame de
Montespan redoubled with the successes of the king, and consoled him for
every other unpleasant circumstance. It was to D’Artagnan the king owed
this; and his majesty was anxious to acknowledge these services; he
wrote to M. Colbert:

“MONSIEUR COLBERT,--We have a promise to fulfil with M. d’Artagnan,
who so well keeps his. This is to inform you that the time is come for
performing it. All provisions for this purpose you shall be furnished
with in due time. LOUIS.”

In consequence of this, Colbert, detaining D’Artagnan’s envoy, placed in
the hands of that messenger a letter from himself, and a small coffer
of ebony inlaid with gold, not very important in appearance, but which,
without doubt, was very heavy, as a guard of five men was given to the
messenger, to assist him in carrying it. These people arrived before
the place which D’Artagnan was besieging towards daybreak, and presented
themselves at the lodgings of the general. They were told that M.
d’Artagnan, annoyed by a sortie which the governor, an artful man, had
made the evening before, and in which the works had been destroyed and
seventy-seven men killed, and the reparation of the breaches commenced,
had just gone with twenty companies of grenadiers to reconstruct the
works.

M. Colbert’s envoy had orders to go and seek M. d’Artagnan, wherever
he might be, or at whatever hour of the day or night. He directed his
course, therefore, towards the trenches, followed by his escort, all
on horseback. They perceived M. d’Artagnan in the open plain, with his
gold-laced hat, his long cane, and gilt cuffs. He was biting his white
mustache, and wiping off, with his left hand, the dust which the passing
balls threw up from the ground they plowed so near him. They also saw,
amidst this terrible fire, which filled the air with whistling hisses,
officers handling the shovel, soldiers rolling barrows, and vast
fascines, rising by being either carried or dragged by from ten to
twenty men, cover the front of the trench reopened to the center by this
extraordinary effort of the general. In three hours, all was reinstated.
D’Artagnan began to speak more mildly; and he became quite calm when the
captain of the pioneers approached him, hat in hand, to tell him that
the trench was again in proper order. This man had scarcely finished
speaking, when a ball took off one of his legs, and he fell into the
arms of D’Artagnan. The latter lifted up his soldier, and quietly, with
soothing words, carried him into the trench, amidst the enthusiastic
applause of the regiments. From that time it was no longer a question of
valor--the army was delirious; two companies stole away to the advanced
posts, which they instantly destroyed.

When their comrades, restrained with great difficulty by D’Artagnan, saw
them lodged upon the bastions, they rushed forward likewise; and soon a
furious assault was made upon the counterscarp, upon which depended the
safety of the place. D’Artagnan perceived there was only one means left
of checking his army--to take the place. He directed all his force to
the two breaches, where the besieged were busy in repairing. The shock
was terrible; eighteen companies took part in it, and D’Artagnan went
with the rest, within half cannon-shot of the place, to support the
attack by _echelons_. The cries of the Dutch, who were being poniarded
upon their guns by D’Artagnan’s grenadiers, were distinctly audible. The
struggle grew fiercer with the despair of the governor, who disputed his
position foot by foot. D’Artagnan, to put an end to the affair, and
to silence the fire, which was unceasing, sent a fresh column, which
penetrated like a very wedge; and he soon perceived upon the ramparts,
through the fire, the terrified flight of the besieged, pursued by the
besiegers.

At this moment the general, breathing feely and full of joy, heard a
voice behind him, saying, “Monsieur, if you please, from M. Colbert.”

He broke the seal of the letter, which contained these words:

“MONSIEUR D’ARTAGNAN:--The king commands me to inform you that he has
nominated you marechal of France, as a reward for your magnificent
services, and the honor you do to his arms. The king is highly
pleased, monsieur, with the captures you have made; he commands you, in
particular, to finish the siege you have commenced, with good fortune to
you, and success for him.”

D’Artagnan was standing with a radiant countenance and sparkling eye.
He looked up to watch the progress of his troops upon the walls, still
enveloped in red and black volumes of smoke. “I have finished,” replied
he to the messenger; “the city will have surrendered in a quarter of an
hour.” He then resumed his reading:

“The _coffret_, Monsieur d’Artagnan, is my own present. You will not be
sorry to see that, whilst you warriors are drawing the sword to defend
the king, I am moving the pacific arts to ornament a present worthy of
you. I commend myself to your friendship, monsieur le marechal, and beg
you to believe in mine. COLBERT”

D’Artagnan, intoxicated with joy, made a sign to the messenger, who
approached, with his _coffret_ in his hands. But at the moment the
_marechal_ was going to look at it, a loud explosion resounded from the
ramparts, and called his attention towards the city. “It is strange,”
 said D’Artagnan, “that I don’t yet see the king’s flag on the walls, or
hear the drums beat the _chamade_.” He launched three hundred fresh men,
under a high-spirited officer, and ordered another breach to be made.
Then, more tranquilly, he turned towards the _coffret_, which Colbert’s
envoy held out to him.--It was his treasure--he had won it.

D’Artagnan was holding out his hand to open the _coffret_, when a ball
from the city crushed the _coffret_ in the arms of the officer, struck
D’Artagnan full in the chest, and knocked him down upon a sloping heap
of earth, whilst the _fleur-de-lised baton_, escaping from the broken
box, came rolling under the powerless hand of the _marechal_. D’Artagnan
endeavored to raise himself. It was thought he had been knocked down
without being wounded. A terrible cry broke from the group of terrified
officers; the _marechal_ was covered with blood; the pallor of death
ascended slowly to his noble countenance. Leaning upon the arms held
out on all sides to receive him, he was able once more to turn his eyes
towards the place, and to distinguish the white flag at the crest of the
principal bastion; his ears, already deaf to the sounds of life, caught
feebly the rolling of the drum which announced the victory. Then,
clasping in his nerveless hand the _baton_, ornamented with its
_fleurs-de-lis_, he cast on it his eyes, which had no longer the power
of looking upwards towards Heaven, and fell back, murmuring strange
words, which appeared to the soldiers cabalistic--words which had
formerly represented so many things on earth, and which none but the
dying man any longer comprehended:

“Athos--Porthos, farewell till we meet again! Aramis, adieu forever!”

Of the four valiant men whose history we have related, there now
remained but one. Heaven had taken to itself three noble souls.

End of The Man in the Iron Mask.




Thanks for listening, Please subscribe to channel "The Classic Narrator" for future release.
